
The following represents the provided background information to complete the task.

This is a quick introduction:
What Is Lojban?: `.i la lojban. mo`  
---  
Prev| | Next  
  
* * *

# Chapter 1. Questions and Answers on Lojban

`preti ce'o danfu sera'a la lojban.`

1\. What is Lojban?

2\. Why was Lojban developed?

3\. Are there other uses for Lojban?

4\. Is Lojban a computer language?

5\. How is Lojban written? How does it sound?

6\. What kind of grammar does Lojban have?

7\. What else is distinctive about Lojban grammar?

8\. Lojban seems complex. How hard is it to learn?

9\. What do you mean by 'unambiguous'?

10\. Can you make jokes in an unambiguous language?

11\. Isn't Esperanto the 'international language'?

12\. How about English as an international language?

13\. Can poetry be written in a 'logical' language or an 'unambiguous' one?

14\. How was Lojban developed?

15\. How many people speak Lojban?

16\. Why should I learn Lojban?

17\. How do I learn Lojban?

18\. What is The Logical Language Group?

19\. How does The Logical Language Group serve the community?

20\. What can I do now?

21\. Who do I contact?

**1.** What is Lojban?

**** Lojban (/LOZH-bahn/) is a constructed language. Originally called
'Loglan' by project founder Dr. James Cooke Brown, who started the language
development in 1955, the goals for the language were first described in the
article _Loglan_ in _Scientific American_ , June 1960. Made well-known by that
article and by occasional references in science fiction and computer
publications, Loglan/Lojban has been built over four decades by dozens of
workers and hundreds of supporters, led since 1987 by The Logical Language
Group.

There are many artificial languages, but Loglan/Lojban has been _engineered_
to make it unique in several ways. The following are the main features of
Lojban:

  * Lojban is designed to be used by people in communication with each other, and possibly in the future with computers.

  * Lojban is designed to be culturally neutral.

  * Lojban grammar is based on the principles of logic.

  * Lojban has an unambiguous grammar.

  * Lojban has phonetic spelling, and sounds can be divided into words in only one way.

  * Lojban is simple compared to natural languages; it is easy to learn.

  * Lojban's 1350 root words can be easily combined to form a vocabulary of millions of words.

  * Lojban is regular; the rules of the language don't have exceptions.

  * Lojban attempts to remove restrictions on creative and clear thought and communication.

  * Lojban has a variety of uses, ranging from creative to scientific, from theoretical to practical.

The following sections examine each of these points, while answering the
questions most often asked about Lojban.

* * *

**2.** Why was Lojban developed?

**** Lojban was originally designed to support research on a concept known as
the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. Simply expressed, this hypothesis states that the
structure of a language constrains the thinking of people using that language.
Lojban allows the full expressive capability of a natural language, but
differs in structure from other languages in major ways. This allows it to be
used as a test vehicle for scientists studying the relationships between
language, thought, and culture. If you are reading this as part of the
introductory booklet, further discussion of these issues can be found in the
section _Technical Descriptions_.

* * *

**3.** Are there other uses for Lojban?

**** Yes, several. Due to its unambiguous grammar and simple structure, it
also can be easily parsed (broken down for analysis) by computers, making it
possible for Lojban to be used in the future for computer-human interaction,
and perhaps conversation. Lojban's structure is similar to existing artificial
intelligence (AI) programming languages, and it may become be a most powerful
adjunct to AI research, especially in the storing and processing of data about
the world and people's conceptions of it. There are also linguists interested
in Lojban's potential as an intermediate language in computer-aided
translation of natural languages; and Lojban is of interest as a potential
stepping-stone for students learning other languages. Because Lojban was
designed to be culturally neutral, and has a powerful vocabulary easily
learned by people of different language origins, some are interested in
Lojban's potential as an international language. These are only the beginnings
of the Lojban applications that will be developed in the future.

* * *

**4.** Is Lojban a computer language?

**** Lojban was designed as a _human language_ , and not as a computer
language. It is therefore intended for use in conversation, reading, writing,
and thinking. However, since Lojban can be processed by a computer much more
easily than can a natural language, it is only a matter of time before Lojban-
based computer applications are developed. Learning and using Lojban doesn't
require you to know anything about computers or to talk like one.

* * *

**5.** How is Lojban written? How does it sound?

**** Lojban uses letters of the Roman alphabet to represent its 6 vowels and
17 consonants. The Lojban character set uses only standard typewriter/computer
keyboard keys; capitalization is used rarely, and only to indicate unusual
stress in the pronunciation of names. Punctuation is spoken as words. The
written language corresponds exactly to the sounds of the spoken language;
spelling is phonetic and unambiguous, and the flowing sounds of the language
break down into words in only one possible way. These features make computer
speech recognition and transcription more practical. Learning to pronounce and
spell Lojban is trivial.

Lojban has a smooth, rhythmic sound, somewhat like Italian. However, its
consonants create a fullness and power found in Slavic languages like Russian,
and the large number of vowel pairs impart a hint of Chinese, Polynesian, and
other Oriental languages, though without the tones that make many of those
languages difficult for others to learn.

Because there are no idioms to shorten expressions, a Lojban text can be
longer than the corresponding colloquial English text. The unambiguous
linguistic structures that result are a major benefit that makes this
worthwhile; and Lojban has constructions of its own that are rather more
succinct than their equivalents in English (such as logic-specific
formulations, and expressions of attitude.) Moreover, much of the
disambiguating machinery of Lojban is optional; you use them only when you
_need_ to use them.

As an example of Lojban, Occam's Razor ("The simplest explanation is usually
the best") may be translated as:

> `roda poi velcki cu so'eroi ke ganai saprai gi xagrai`  
>  /row-dah poy VELSH-kee shoo so-heh-roy keh GAH-nye SAHP-rye ghee KHAH-grye/  
>  _All somethings which-are explanations mostly-are (if superlatively-simple
> then superlatively-good)._

The apostrophe is pronounced like a short, breathy 'h', and is used to clearly
separate the two adjacent vowels for a listener, without requiring a pause
between them.

(If you are reading this text in the _What is Lojban?_ booklet, a full
pronunciation key is available in the _Overview of Lojban Grammar_.)

* * *

**6.** What kind of grammar does Lojban have?

**** 'Grammar' is a word with painful memories for many of us. But though
Lojban grammar seems strange at first sight, it is actually quite simple. It
is based on a system called predicate logic, which states that in any sentence
you have a **relationship** (`_selbri_` in Lojban) between one or more
**arguments** (`_sumti_`). An argument can be a thing, event, quality or just
about anything. To give an example, the English sentence

> _Chris adores Pat_  

has a relation _adore_ , between two arguments, _Chris_ and _Pat_. In Lojban
this would be

> `la kris. prami la pat.`

or, if you prefer,

> `la kris. la pat. prami`

(The full stops mean that you have to pause slightly to separate the words --
anythingelseinLojbancanberuntogetherwithoutbeingmisunderstood).

You might be thinking "Well in that case a relationship is a verb and an
argument is a noun, so why bother with special terminology like `_selbri_` and
whatnot?" However, in Lojban Chris's feelings about Pat might be described
like this:

> `la pat. melbi`  
>  Pat is beautiful.

In English you have a verb ('doing word'), _is_ , and an adjective
('describing word'), _beautiful_. In Turkish, you would say _Pat gï¿½zel_ ,
which is a noun and an adjective, with no verb required. In Chinese you would
use _meili_ , a 'stative verb' \-- but enough! In Lojban you don't need all
these language-specific notions.

Now, if there are no nouns, verbs, subjects or objects in Lojban, how do we
know that `la kris. la pat. prami` means that Chris adores Pat and not the
other way? Different languages handle this problem differently. In English it
is done with word order, and when that isn't enough, with prepositions (words
like _at_ , _from_ , _to_ , _with_ and so on). In other languages, like Latin
or Turkish, it's done by changing the form of the words, e.g. _Pat'i Chris
sever_ in Turkish means "Chris loves Pat", not "Pat loves Chris."

In Lojban, the order in which arguments appear is built in to the meaning of
the word. For example, the word `dunda` means _give_ , but its full meaning
is:

> x1 gives x2 to x3

So `mi pu dunda le cukta le ninmu` means "I gave the book to the woman", not
"I gave the woman to the book").

The important point is that Lojban has a lot of what we would call 'grammar',
but nearly all of this is contained in the `_cmavo_` (structure words), and
you can use as many or as few of them as you want.

* * *

**7.** What else is distinctive about Lojban grammar?

**** In Lojban, it is equally easy to speak of something as being an action as
it is to speak of it as being a state of existence. The distinction between
the two can be ignored, or can be explicitly expressed in a variety of ways:

  * by associating concepts in `_tanru_` metaphors (combinations of `_selbri_` into single expressions giving novel meanings), involving words like `gasnu` ('do'), `zasti` ('exist'), `zukte` ('act with purpose');

  * with a variety of 'operators' (`_cmavo_`) dealing with abstractions such as events, states, properties, amounts, ideas, experience, and truth;

  * or with four pre-defined varieties of causality (others can be developed through `_tanru_` metaphor).

A major benefit of using a predicate grammar is that Lojban doesn't have
inflections and declensions on nouns, verbs, and adjectives. Most natural
languages have evolved such variations to reduce ambiguity as to how words are
related in a sentence. Language change has made these inflections and
declensions highly irregular and thus difficult to learn. Lojban uses the
simple but flexible predicate relationship to erase both the irregularity and
the declensions.

Tense and location markers (inflections), adverbs, and prepositions are
combined into one part of speech. New preposition-like forms can be built at
will from predicates; these allow the user to expand upon a sentence by
attaching and relating arguments not normally included in the meaning of a
word.

Numbers and quantifiers are conceptually expanded from natural languages.
_Many_ , _enough_ , _too much_ , _a few_ , and _at least_ are among concepts
that are expressed as numbers in Lojban. Thus "it costs $3.95" and "it costs
too much" are grammatically identical, and one can talk of being "enough-th in
line" for tickets to a sellout movie. Core concepts of logic, mathematics, and
science are built into the root vocabulary. They enhance discussion of those
topics, and are surprisingly useful in ordinary speech, too.

Predicate logic can express a wide variety of human thought; Lojban also has
non-logical constructs that do not affect or obscure the logical structure,
allowing communications that are not amenable to logical analysis. For
example, Lojban has a full set of emotional indicators, which are similar to
such interjections in English as _Oh!_ , _Aha!_ , and _Wheee!_ , but each has
a specific meaning. Similarly, Lojban has indicators of the speaker's
relationship to what is said (whether it is hearsay, direct observation,
logical deduction, etc.) similar to those found in some Native American
languages.

Lojban supports metalinguistic discussion about the sentences being spoken
while remaining unambiguous. Lojban also supports a variety of 'tense' logic
that allows one to be extremely specific about time and space (and space-time)
relationships. A substantial portion of Lojban's grammar is designed to
support unambiguous statement of mathematical expressions and relations in a
manner compatible both with international usage and the rest of Lojban's
grammar.

Lojban 'parts of speech' are convertible from one to another by using short
structure words (called `_cmavo_`). One can make numbers serve as nouns or
verbs, or invent new numbers and prepositions. Lojban removes many of the
constraints on human thought, while preserving tight control on structural
syntax.

* * *

**8.** Lojban seems complex. How hard is it to learn?

**** Lojban is actually much simpler than natural languages. It is only
slightly more complex in its grammar than the current generation of computer
languages (such as C++ and Perl). Lojban seems complex only because the
varieties of human thought are complex, and Lojban is designed to minimize
constraints on those thoughts. Lojban text can appear longer and more complex
due to its lack of idiom, its complete explicitness of logical structure, and
most importantly, its unfamiliarity. On the other hand, conversational speech
uses less than half of the possible grammatical structures, leaving the rest
for writing and for other circumstances when one is likely to take time to
carefully formulate exact logical phrasings.

Lojban's pronunciation, spelling, word formation, and grammar rules are fixed,
and the language is free of exceptions to these rules. Such exceptions are the
bane of learning to speak a natural language _correctly_. Without the burden
of ambiguity, Lojban users can be precise and specific more easily than in
other languages.

Because Lojban's grammar is simple, it is easier to learn than other
languages. Using flashcard-like techniques, a working vocabulary including the
complete set of 1350 root words can take 8-12 weeks of study at 1 hour per
day. It is by no means uncommon for people who embark on learning Lojban to be
able to write grammatical Lojban within a few days, and to hold at least a
limited conversation within a few weeks. Natural languages, especially
English, take several years to learn to a comparable level of skill.

The available Lojban teaching materials are so structured that you can learn
the language without classroom instruction or a close community of speakers.
Communication practice with others is needed to achieve fluency, but you can
start using the language as you achieve proficiency.

* * *

**9.** What do you mean by 'unambiguous'?

****Lojban has an unambiguous grammar (proven by computer analysis of a formal
grammar), pronunciation, and **morphology** (word forms). In practice this
means that the person who reads or hears a Lojban sentence is never in doubt
as to what words it contains or what roles they play in the sentence. This is
true even if the words are unfamiliar, so long as the spelling and grammar
rules are known. Lojban has no words that sound alike but have different
meanings (like _herd_ and _heard_), that have multiple unrelated meanings
(_set_), or that differ only in punctuation but not in sound (like the
abominable _its_ and _it's_). There is never any doubt about where words begin
and end (if you hear _cargo ship_ , do you hear two words or three?) Most
important, the function of each word is inescapably clear; there is nothing
like the English sentence _Time flies like an arrow_ , in which any of the
first three words could be the verb.

Lojban is _not_ entirely unambiguous, of course; human beings occasionally
desire to be ambiguous in their expressions. In Lojban, this ambiguity is
limited to semantics, `_tanru_` metaphor, and intentional omission of
information (ellipsis).

Semantic ambiguity results because words in natural languages represent
families of concepts rather than individual meanings. These meanings often
have only weak semantic relationships to each other (the English word _run_ is
a good example.) In addition, each individual's personal experiences provide
emotional connotations to words. By providing a fresh, culturally-neutral
start, Lojban attempts to minimize the transference of these associations as
people learn the language. Most Lojban words do not much resemble
corresponding words in other languages; the differences aid in making this
fresh start possible.

Lojban's powerful `_tanru_` (combinations of `_selbri_` into novel concepts)
and word-building features make it easy to make fine distinctions between
concepts. This discourages the tendency for individual words to acquire
families of meanings. Lojban's `_tanru_` metaphors are themselves ambiguous;
they specify a relationship between concepts, but not what the relationship
is. That relationship can be made explicit using unambiguous logical
constructs if necessary, or can be left vague, as the speaker typically
desires. Similarly, portions of the logical structure of a Lojban expression
can be omitted, greatly simplifying the expression while causing some
ambiguity. Unlike in the natural languages, though, this ambiguity is readily
identified by a reader or listener. Thus all ambiguity in Lojban is
constrained and recognizable, and can be clarified as necessary by further
interaction.

This precision in no way confines the meaning of a Lojban sentence. It is
possible to be fanciful or ridiculous, to tell lies, or to be misunderstood.
You can be very specific, or you can be intentionally vague. Your hearer may
not understand what you _meant_ , but will always understand what you _said_.

* * *

**10.** Can you make jokes in an unambiguous language?

****Most humor arises from situation and character and is as funny in Lojban
as in any language. Humor based on word play, of course, is language-
dependent. Lojban has no homonyms, and hence no simple puns; puns derived from
similar sounds are still possible, and have in fact been attempted (for
example in the Lojban translation of _Alice in Wonderland_). Since Lojban will
almost always be a second language, bilingual puns and word play abound, often
based on the relative ambiguity of the other languages involved. Humor based
on internal grammatical ambiguity is of course impossible in Lojban, but humor
based on nonsensical statements, or on logical structures that would be
difficult to clearly express in another language, becomes easier.

As speakers become fluent, and conventional phrases come into use, Lojban will
develop its own forms of spoonerisms and subtle puns. Unique forms of Lojban
word-play have already turned up; they exploit the way small variations in
Lojban grammar create unexpected variations in meaning, and the capability to
simply express rather mind-boggling relationships. Like all word-play, these
lose zest when translated into other languages.

Related to humor is the aphorism: the pithy saying that gains pungency or
poignancy from terse, elegant phrasing. Lojban seems as capable of aphorisms
as any language, perhaps more than most; however, because the language is so
young, few such aphorisms have been devised to date.

* * *

**11.** Isn't Esperanto the 'international language'?

****There have been hundreds of artificial international languages developed,
of which Esperanto is the most successful and widely known. Esperanto, like
most other such languages, was based on European languages in both grammar and
vocabulary. Although it manages to be relatively neutral between them, it
still retains an inherent cultural bias which makes it unsuited for most of
the purposes that Lojban was designed for.

Lojban is culturally fully neutral. Its vocabulary was built algorithmically
using today's six most widely spoken languages: Chinese, Hindi, English,
Russian, Spanish, and Arabic. Lojban's words thus show roots in three major
families of languages spoken by most of the world's people. Lojban's grammar
accommodates structures found in non-European languages, and uses sounds found
in many of the world's languages. Coupled with the potential computer
applications that will make Lojban a useful language to know, Lojban's
potential as an international language may be more far-reaching than
Esperanto's.

Lojban was not designed primarily to be an international language, however,
but rather as a linguistic tool for studying and understanding language. Its
linguistic and computer applications make Lojban unique among proposed
international languages: Lojban can be successful without immediately being
accepted and adopted everywhere, and Lojban can be useful and interesting even
to those skeptical of or hostile towards the international language movement.

Since Lojban is also not in direct competition with Esperanto, it has proven
attractive to Esperantists interested in acquiring a new perspective on their
own international language, and who feel less threatened because Lojban has
different goals. Lojban's supporters recognize that it will take decades for
Lojban to acquire both the number and variety of speakers and the extensive
history of usage that marks Esperanto culture. Meanwhile, each language
community has much to learn from the other; this process is already well
underway.

* * *

**12.** How about English as an international language?

**** English is commonly used as an 'international language' in the fields of
science and technology, and is probably the most widely spoken language in the
world. American dominance of technology in the twentieth century has caused
massive borrowing from English into other languages that do not have words for
all these new concepts. This dominance, and a heritage of colonialism and
imperialism that has built resentment towards American and European
impositions on native cultures, has caused recent movements in other countries
_away_ from English. The rising influence of other non-English-speaking
countries on world economics, science, and technology makes further declines
in the universality of English likely.

In addition, many who know English as a second language speak it only
minimally, though they may be able to read or understand many words. India is
a prominent example of a country where English is the only language more or
less understood throughout the country, which has about 1500 languages and
dialects; but the English spoken in India is often unintelligible to Americans
or Britons. In fact, English is one of the most difficult languages to learn
to use well. In countries where English is spoken along with other languages,
it has been adapted into dialects which match the local culture and borrow
words from the other local languages. Some of these dialects are as much as
70% unintelligible to American or British speakers, or to each other. As such,
there is no single English language to call an 'international' one.

Lojban is a single language, with design features to discourage breaking up
into separate languages. While it was developed primarily by Americans, and
was designed to be at least as expressive as English is, Lojban's cultural
neutrality gives equal priority to the structures and concepts of other
languages and cultures. This cultural neutrality enhances Lojban's
acceptability as an international language. Since it is as capable as English
is of generating or borrowing any words needed to support the concepts of
science and technology, and has special advantages for computer applications,
Lojban is likely to spread worldwide through the technological community. Far
more so than English, Lojban is simple and easy to learn for people of all
cultures.

* * *

**13.** Can poetry be written in a 'logical' language or an 'unambiguous' one?

**** Original poetry has already been written in Lojban, and some has been
translated into the language. Lojban's powerful `_tanru_` metaphor structure
allows you to build concepts into words easily, as you need them, and has been
used to create colorful images and to convey moving emotions. A Lojban speaker
doesn't need a dictionary to use and understand millions of words that can
potentially exist in the language. The absence of cultural constraints makes
consideration of new ideas and relationships easier than in natural languages,
spurring creativity. Lojban aids in communicating abstractions by identifying
their nature explicitly. Lojban is thus a very powerful language, not only for
poetry, but for discussing such abstract fields as philosophy, physics,
metaphysics, and religion.

Lojban poets are already experimenting with new (and old) forms of poetry that
seem especially well suited to the rhythm, sound, and flow of the language.
Rarely do poets have such an opportunity to affect the development of a new
language as they now can with Lojban. Lojban's rich and powerful. Lojban
unleashes the full potential of poetic expression to communicate both concrete
and abstract ideas.

* * *

**14.** How was Lojban developed?

**** The language, then called 'Loglan', was first described in the 1950s by
Dr. James Cooke Brown. The 1960 Scientific American article _Loglan_ was his
call for assistance in developing the language. A revolution in linguistics
was simultaneously taking place, resulting in a rapidly increasing knowledge
of the nature of human language; this changed the requirements for the
developing language. The first widely distributed Loglan dictionary and
language description did not appear until 1975; the incompleteness of this
description and continued development work discouraged people from learning
the language. Furthermore, computers caught up with Loglan just then, making
it possible to refine the grammar, eliminate ambiguity and mathematically
prove its absence. For over forty years, this work has been performed by
volunteers, and without financial support. Now, after several versions of the
language, people have been learning and using the current version, which is
the first to be called 'Lojban' (from the roots "logical-language" in Lojban).

This version is the first version with a stable vocabulary, and the first to
have a stable and completely defined grammar. The stabilization of the
language in this version has followed a painstaking and extensive period of
research and analysis, between 1988 and 1998. Thus, in an important sense,
Lojban is a very new language. To ensure Lojban remains stable while people
learn it, the language definition is being closely controlled; the grammar and
core vocabulary have already been baselined (frozen) for several years. When
the number of speakers has grown significantly, and a Lojban literature has
developed, Lojban will be treated like a natural language and allowed to grow
and flourish without constraint, as do other natural languages.

* * *

**15.** How many people speak Lojban?

****Questions of how many people speak a language greatly depend on your
presuppositions and definitions -- which a language like Lojban, at least, can
make explicit! The on-line Lojban mailing list, which constitutes the largest
community of people using the language, has over 200 subscribers, with well
over 20 regular posters as of this writing. The level of confidence of the
language community has already risen to such a level that there is a Lojban-
language-only discussion group, as well as the general mailing list. Lojban
has also been used extensively in real-time conversation, both electronically
(IRC) and face-to-face. Though the Lojban-speaking community is so widely
diffused that the opportunity for conversation does not arise frequently, the
number of Lojbanists who can sustain a conversation in the language certainly
ranges beyond what can be counted on the fingers of one hand, and is steadily
increasing. Lojban has been proven in communicative use for well over a
decade, and the range and expressivity of the language is being continually
explored by the language community.

The first speakers of Lojban have a unique opportunity. They are the history-
makers who will shape the flavor of the first totally new language to achieve
broad speakability. Their ideas will be most influential in setting the
patterns of usage that others will learn from. Their experiences will teach
things about language that have never before been learned -- or learnable.

* * *

**16.** Why should I learn Lojban?

**** There are several reasons for learning the language now. Those who are
working with the language now are actively consulted for their opinions on how
to teach and spread the language. Within a few weeks of work learning from the
materials already written, you will be able to work with those who have
already started. You will be a significant part of this small but rapidly
growing community. You will receive personal attention to any problems you
have with the language from those leading the effort. If you are truly
ambitious and committed to the language, you are welcome to join in that
leadership.

Those with a computer background who learn the language now will be the
leaders in developing the earliest practical computer applications for the
language. Meanwhile, computer-oriented Lojbanists can also aid in developing
computer-aided instruction tools or converting existing software to run on new
computers.

People not interested in computers will also find Lojban a valuable language.
You may be interested in the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, and in the scientific
tests to be planned and conducted, or in other language-related research. You
may be interested in Lojban's potential as an international language, and in
the attempts to use the language to reach across cultural boundaries.

Regardless of your background, you will find learning Lojban to be a mind-
expanding experience. Learning any language other than your native tongue
broadens your perspectives and allows you to transcend the necessarily limited
viewpoints of your native language's culture. Lojban, being simpler to learn
than natural languages, provides this benefit much more quickly than does the
study of other languages. And being quite different from natural languages,
Lojban provides this benefit more directly.

Having learned Lojban, you will find it easier to learn other languages and to
communicate with people from other backgrounds, regardless of the language
studied; the linguistic principles you learn while learning Lojban are
applicable to these languages and the communication problems they entail. The
logical organization embedded in Lojban will aid you in organizing and
clarifying your thoughts. Your new perspective on language, ambiguity, and
communication will allow you to express those thoughts more clearly, even when
you use an ambiguous natural language.

You needn't learn Lojban for any practical purpose, however. Many, if not
most, of those who are learning Lojban are doing so because it is fun.
Learning Lojban is intellectually stimulating, providing human interaction (a
way to meet other people and get to know them) and mental challenge. Lojban
has all the benefits of games designed for entertainment, with the side
benefit of that entertainment developing into a useful skill.

Learning Lojban as an intellectual toy means that you can get enjoyment from
learning Lojban without anywhere near the effort needed to benefit from
studying other languages. While becoming fluent in Lojban will probably take
hundreds of hours over several months, you can feel some sense of
accomplishment in the language after just a couple of hours of study. You can
use Lojban immediately for fun, while gaining skill with greater experience.

* * *

**17.** How do I learn Lojban?

**** This text appears in a booklet including a description of the grammar of
Lojban and some introductory learning materials. If you are reading this text
in a separately printed brochure, you may write to the Logical Language Group
at the address found at the end of this brochure, and we will be happy to
provide the complete booklet. We request a contribution of $5 to cover its
cost.

If you are reading this brochure on-line, or have access to the Internet, the
complete _What is Lojban?_ booklet is also available on the World Wide Web for
free at the address:

> `http://www.lojban.org/publications/level0.html`

Once you have read this booklet, there are several directions you may proceed,
depending on your goals for use of the language.

Most people learning the language will work for some time on their own before
working with others. We recommend, where possible, that you identify at least
one other person to study and interact with, either in person or by mail. The
Logical Language Group maintains lists of Lojban students of various degrees
of skill and activity levels. There is also both a general and an in-Lojban
discussion group available on the Internet. Information will be found at the
end of this document.

Almost any use you wish to make of Lojban requires some degree of mastery of
the basic vocabulary. You can learn enough Lojban grammar to support
conversation in just a couple of hours, but you will need vocabulary in order
to use that grammar.

You can learn the Lojban vocabulary using computer software. The Logical
Language Group has computer-aided-teaching programs distributed under the name
_LogFlash_, with MS-DOS/Windows, Macintosh and Unix versions currently
available. The software is based on flash-card teaching techniques, which are
extremely efficient in helping you learn the vocabulary. Other computer
software is available, including a parser and a glosser.

You can learn the Lojban grammar in several ways, including by studying the
examples in our on-line text archives and mailing lists, and by going through
the formal grammar description. (The formal grammars are available in two
formats, _YACC_ and simplified _E-BNF_.)

An introduction to the grammar of Lojban will be found in _Technical
Descriptions_ in the _What is Lojban?_ booklet. There is also a set of
introductory lessons available (these cover the basics of the language, but at
a more leisurely pace): _Lojban for Beginners_ , by Robin Turner and Nick
Nicholas. A complete grammatical description of Lojban, _The Complete Lojban
Language_ by John W. Cowan, was published by the Logical Language Group in
1997. This is an authoritative reference, and can be used as an aid to
learning the advanced features of the language.

A formal Lojban dictionary is being compiled, and will encompass the word
lists already available from the Logical Language Group as of this writing.
Draft versions of the dictionary are available on the Lojban web site (see
contact details below).

Of course the only way to really learn a language is to _use_ it. The Logical
Language Group will assist you in finding other Lojban students of comparable
skill level and interests, either in your local area or reachable by post or
electronic mail. The on-line Lojban discussion groups regularly contain Lojban
text, some with detailed translations and some without translation, as well as
discussions of language points by various members of the Lojban community.
There is also a discussion group specifically for beginners as of this
writing. Of course the best way to use the language is to recruit friends and
associates into studying and using the language with you. Even if they are not
interested in the same language goals as you are, the 'hobbyist' aspect of the
language will provide interesting and stimulating entertainment for all
concerned.

* * *

**18.** What is The Logical Language Group?

****The Logical Language Group, Inc. is a non-profit organization, the
embodiment of the Loglan/Lojban community. We were founded to complete the
language development process, to develop and publish teaching materials, to
organize and teach the community, to promote applications of Lojban, and to
initiate and lead research efforts in linguistics, language education, and
other areas related to Lojban. Simply put, our purpose is to serve you in all
manner of things Lojbanic. The Logical Language Group is not affiliated with
The Loglan Institute, Inc., the organization founded by James Cooke Brown.

The Logical Language Group is also called `la lojbangirz.` (_/lah lozh-BAHN-
geerz./_), its Lojban name. It was founded informally in 1987, and
incorporated in 1988. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service approved our status as
a non-profit educational/scientific charity in 1989, making donations and
grants to the organization deductible under U.S. tax law.

Loglan/Lojban has been developed almost totally by volunteer labor and small
donations of money. Lojban attracts people who are willing to devote a lot of
time and effort to seeing their dreams become reality. Thus, our only income
has been money derived from sales of our publications, and donations from
interested supporters.

The Logical Language Group publishes and sells printed materials on Lojban.
All language definition information is considered in the public domain, and
most Logical Language Group publications are distributed under a policy which
allows not-for-charge copying and redistribution. Computer versions of many of
our publications are available on-line at no charge. We ask people who receive
our materials by any of these means to let us know, so that we may better
serve you, and donate liberally, so that we may continue to serve you.

Most materials that we sell require either prior payment, an informal
commitment to pay on your part, or your statement that you cannot afford to
pay for materials (in which case our supplying these materials is at our
discretion). We attempt to flexibly support Lojbanists who have financial
constraints, and will accept reasonable offers of reduced or delayed payments
subject to our financial condition, given your commitment to actively maintain
contact and involvement with the community. Obviously, the level of your prior
and current activity and any commitments you make to learning the language, or
to volunteer work for `la lojbangirz.`, will be factored into our decision.

`la lojbangirz.` has a special commitment to support Lojbanists outside the
U.S., because so many of the language goals are dependent on building an
international community of speakers, and because we recognize the difficulties
caused by the international currency market and the relative wealth of
nations. We can accept bank cheques in most currencies and international
payment via PayPal. We also encourage people to form groups so that they can
receive a single copy of our materials, copying or passing them to others to
keep the per-person costs low. We expect a lower standard of contact and
contribution from overseas Lojbanists when deciding whether to continue
sending our materials at reduced or no charge.

We ask all recipients of our materials to help us financially in any way you
can. The Logical Language Group needs your gifts for support of the
Loglan/Lojban project. Artificial languages are historically not self-
sustaining financially, and have difficulty receiving outside support. The
Logical Language Group, Inc. is prohibited by its bylaws from spending more
than 15% of its expenses for administrative purposes, except by special
agreement with a donor who agrees to cover such added costs in full.

* * *

**19.** How does The Logical Language Group serve the community?

**** The Logical Language Group coordinates and promotes activities involving
Lojban and the Lojban community. In that role, it publishes materials enabling
people to learn the language, and facilitates their forming a community of
speakers. Most people involved with Lojban stay informed by checking our web
page or participating in the Lojban mailing lists (see contact details below).
The Logical Language Group also publishes newsletters and journals, including
both general news, aimed at those not actively involved in learning and using
the language, and more specific material, including discussions of features of
the language, debates on research issues and applications, letters from the
community and responses, and Lojban writings and translations.

Our printed publications are free of advertisements (other than our own
ordering information, and occasional mention of individuals and organizations
who have contributed particular service to our efforts); and we do not sell
our mailing list. Our publications are distributed as cheaply as possible to
encourage new people to participate. In the interest of attracting the widest
audience possible, we are committed to distributing as much material as
possible using the 'open source' concept for computer software and a similar
policy for printed publications. This policy retains our copyrights but allows
you, with relatively few restrictions, to copy our materials for your friends.

Certain materials that we publish contain information that we place in the
public domain. **All language definition information is considered to be
public.**

If you are attempting to learn the language, we will provide as much help as
we can to assist you. We will put you in touch with Lojbanists who might be
interested in studying or communicating with you in the language. You can also
send your writings to us for review, or for indirect exchange with others. We
try to foster research and social interaction among those who are learning, or
who have already learned the language. We aid such people in organizing,
leading, and teaching formal classes and study groups, and will sponsor
affiliated groups in local areas where non-profit sponsorship can be of
benefit. We conduct an annual celebration of the language and community (July
or August), called 'Logfest', in conjunction with our annual business meeting
in the Washington DC area. We also expect to support other local meetings and
gatherings as the community grows.

Of course, we also try to publicize the language. Our representatives can
attend meetings to give presentations on the language. We distribute
informational material, including these booklets. Through our efforts, and
with your help, the community of Lojbanists is rapidly growing.

* * *

**20.** What can I do now?

**** You can become involved in the Lojban project in a variety of ways,
depending on your background and interests, and on your available time:

  * you can participate in completing the language documentation;

  * you can devise applications for Lojban in computers, education, linguistics, and other fields;

  * you can help in organizing Lojbanists in your area, and in recruiting new Lojbanists;

  * you can help in teaching the language to new people (even while learning yourself);

  * you can assist in spreading Lojban to non-English-speaking cultures by helping translate materials into other languages, and by identifying, recruiting, and communicating with contacts in other countries (international involvement is vital to ensuring that Lojban remains culturally neutral);

  * you can contribute financially to support our organization, its activities, and its publications;

  * you can use Lojban in composition, translation, and conversation with other Lojbanists.

For many of these activities, you need to learn the language first. However,
even those who haven't yet had time to learn the language can assist in
recruiting and contributing ideas to the effort.

Helping to publicize the language, of course, does not take a lot of time, or
necessarily even knowing the language. Talk to friends, relatives and
colleagues. We will gladly provide copies of this brochure on request. Lojban
tends to sell itself; people who learn of it are more often than not intrigued
by it.

Keep in touch with us. We want to know your ideas and opinions on the
language, on our various activities, and on our products. We welcome open
debate on the language, and have even printed and made available writings that
are critical of various aspects of our efforts, when they are of sufficient
general interest. Open debate aids in understanding and improves the overall
quality of the language and of our presentation of it to the world. Much of
the language design is now complete, and the Logical Language Group is
committed to maintaining a stable version of the language. Nonetheless, we
would rather hear criticism now within our community and either correct our
problems or prepare an adequate response, than do so later when such issues
are raised by outsiders.

In short, Lojban is a product of _all_ of the community, including _you_ \--
if you choose.

Of course, the most important thing you can do is:

> **Use Lojban!:** Lojban will not really achieve the status of 'language'
> until people _use_ it. We need creative people to write Lojban prose,
> poetry, and dialog. We need translations made from fiction, technical
> literature, from religious and philosophical writings, and from music.
> _Only_ in this way will Lojban be proven practical, and gain the credibility
> it needs to succeed.

* * *

**21.** Who do I contact?

**** We have several volunteers who serve to coordinate Lojban activities in
specific regions of the world. There is also a limited amount of Lojban
materials translated into languages other than English. This support is
constantly being added to; please contact us for details.

The Logical Language Group's website, which contains all its publicly
available information, is at:

> `http://www.lojban.org`

Several active Lojban-related mailing lists are available on the Internet. The
general Lojban list is `lojban`; the list for discussions in Lojban only is
`jbosnu`; and the list specifically for beginners is `lojban-beginners`. They
may be accessed as follows:

Web|  | 

  * `http://groups.yahoo.com/group/lojban`
  * `http://groups.yahoo.com/group/jbosnu`
  * `http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/` (lojban-beginners)

  
---|---|---  
Email|  | 

  * `[email protected]`
  * `[email protected]`
  * `[email protected]`

  
Subscribe|  | `http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/` for all lists.  
  
(All lists are mirrored outside `yahoo.com`, on the Lojban web server:
`http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/`)

If you have received a registration form and an order form with this booklet,
you can provide us with useful information to aid us in serving you, and can
order some of our materials. Write or call:

> The Logical Language Group, Inc.  
>  2904 Beau Lane  
>  Fairfax, VA 22031  
>  U.S.A.  
>  (+1 703) 385-0273

E-mail can be sent to us at: `[email protected]`

> `.e'osai ko sarji la lojban.`  
>  _/eh-ho-sigh, ko-SAHR-zhee, lah LOZH-bahn./_  
>  Please support Lojban!

* * *

* * *

Prev| Home| Next  
---|---|---  
Introduction| Up| Technical Descriptions



The next paragraphs are the a broad set of lecturers on Lojban:
Lojban Wave Lessons/Single page

From Lojban

### Namespaces

  * Page
  * Discussion

### More

  * More

### Page actions

  * Read
  * View source
  * History

Made by la klaku with help from various Lojbanists. Based on the work of la
.kribacr. Spring 2013.

## Contents

  * 1 Foreword
    * 1.1 Lesson 0: Sounds
      * 1.1.1 Vowels
      * 1.1.2 Consonants
      * 1.1.3 Letter names
      * 1.1.4 Correct pronunciation
      * 1.1.5 Writing Lojban
      * 1.1.6 Lojbanized foreign proper names (cmevla)
  * 2 Lessons
    * 2.1 Lesson 1: Bridi, jufra, sumti and selbri
    * 2.2 Lesson 2: Skipping around with **FA** and **zo'e**
    * 2.3 Lesson 3: tanru and **lo**
    * 2.4 Lesson 4: Attitudinals
    * 2.5 Lesson 5: Reordering places with **SE**
    * 2.6 Lesson 6: Abstractions
    * 2.7 Lesson 7: **NOI**
    * 2.8 Lesson 8: Terminator elision
    * 2.9 Lesson 9: sumtcita
    * 2.10 Lesson 10: **PU** , **FAhA** , **ZI** , **VA** , **ZEhA** , **VEhA**
    * 2.11 Lesson 11: **ZAhO**
    * 2.12 Lesson 12: Orders and questions
    * 2.13 Lesson 13: Morphology and word classes
    * 2.14 Lesson 14: Lojban sumti 1Ë LE and LA
    * 2.15 Lesson 15: Lojban sumti 2Ë KOhA3, KOhA5 and KOhA6
    * 2.16 Lesson 16: Lojban sumti 3Ë derived sumti
    * 2.17 Lesson 17: Cute assorted words
    * 2.18 Lesson 18: Quotes
    * 2.19 Lesson 19: Numbers
    * 2.20 Lesson 20: **bo** , **ke** , **co** , and more cuteness
    * 2.21 Lesson 21: **COI**
    * 2.22 Lesson 22: Quantifying sumti
    * 2.23 Lesson 23: Negation
    * 2.24 Lesson 24: brika'i/pro-bridi and **ko'a**
    * 2.25 Lesson 25: Logical connectives
    * 2.26 Lesson 26: Non-logical connectives
    * 2.27 Lesson 27: Lojban logicË **da** , **bu'a** , **zo'u** , and terms
    * 2.28 Lesson 28: Types
    * 2.29 Lesson 29: Semantics of simple abstractions
    * 2.30 Lesson 30: Semantics of functions
    * 2.31 Lesson 31: The not-so-cute assorted words
    * 2.32 End of lessons

# Foreword

These lessons are an attempt to expand on the Lessons originally started in
Google Wave network, an excellent Lojban tutorial authored by la .kribacr., la
xalbo, and transcribed by Marenz (which were parallel to lessons 1-4 of this
tutorial). It explains newer rules of Lojban not covered by older materials
such as "What is Lojban?" and "Lojban for Beginners".

If you are new to Lojban, I recommend listening to any recordings you can find
of spoken Lojban (readings, music, conversation) both before and while you are
taking this tutorial, in order to make yourself familiar with the sounds and
words of the language. Furthermore, try to say the things you read in Lojban
accent if it's reasonably practical. This can help your pronunciation a lot.

When taking this tutorial, it's best to pause between lessons in order to
internalize what you have learnt. I have attempted to build these lessons from
the bottom up and exclude any words or concepts that have not been explained
in previous lessons. Once explained, they are used freely throughout the
remainder of the tutorial. I urge readers not to pass any misunderstood
content; if you have questions or are uncertain about something, feel free to
ask the Lojban community, which can be found in Lojban Live Chat or on Google
Groups. They will be happy to help.

In this tutorial, Lojban text is written in **bold**. Later, when Lojban
loanwords are used in English sentences, they are not marked. Answers to
exercises are displayed as a grey bar. Highlight the text in order to see it.
English terms are written in _italic_.

Lastly, I have as far as possible attempted to use the Lojban words for
grammatical constructs: **sumka'i** instead of _pro-sumti_ , **sumtcita**
instead of _modal_ and **jufra** instead of _utterance_. This is because I
feel the English words are often either arbitrary, in which case they are just
more words to learn, or misleading, in which case they are worse than useless.
In either case, as long as the words are specific to those who are learning
Lojban anyway, there is no reason for them to exist as separate English words.

## Lesson 0: Sounds

While you are (hopefully) eager to get started on the inner workings of Lojban
grammar, a short lesson on the sounds and writing conventions of the language
is beneficial. Learning a language only by reading is hard, and it's not
easier if your internal voice is mispronouncing it.

For more details on vowels and consonants sounds used in Lojban, click on the
letters described. They are pointing to Wikipedia articles which describe the
sound and usually have an audio record of it.

### Vowels

There are five proper vowels in Lojban and one almost-vowel. First the proper
ones:

**a** | as in "father" or "large"   
---|---  
**e** | as in "get" or "gem"   
**i** | as in "machine" or "scream" (not as in "hit")   
**o** | as in "bold" or "more" â not as in "so" (this should be a 'pure' sound.)   
**u** | as in "rude" or "due" (not as in "but")   
**y** | as "a" in "Tina" (not as in "but")   
  
  

These are pretty much the same as vowels in Italian or Spanish. The sixth
(almost-)vowel, **y** , is called a "schwa" in the language trade, and is
pronounced as "comm _a_ ", "tak _e_ n" or "s _u_ rprise!". It's the sound that
comes out when the mouth is completely relaxed.

Two vowels together are pronounced as one sound (and called a "diphthong").
Some examples are:

  

**ai** | as in "high"   
---|---  
**au** | as in "how"   
**ei** | as in "hey"   
**oi** | as in "boy"   
**ia** | as in "yacht"   
**ie** | as in "yes"   
**iu** | as in "you"   
**ua** | as in "wander"   
**ue** | as in "wet"   
**uo** | as in "woke"   
**ui** | as in "we"   
  
  
**i** and **u** act as semivowels when they precede another vowel. Double
vowels are rare. The only examples are **ii** , which is pronounced like
English "ye" (as in _Oh come all ye faithful_) or Chinese "yi", and **uu** ,
pronounced like "woo".

Note that because of variation between English dialects, approximations like
these will necessarily be wrong for some speakers. The surest way to learn the
phonology of the language is to imitate those who already speak it!

### Consonants

There are seventeen consonants in Lojban and one almost-consonant. The Lojban
consonants are the same as the English, except that Lojban doesn't use the
letters H, Q or W. Most of the consonants are pronounced like in English, but
there are some exceptions:

**g** always "g" as in "gum", never "g" as in "gem"  
---  
**c** "sh", as in "ship"  
**j** as in "measure" or French "bonjour"  
**x** as in the exclamation "Ach!", or in German "Bach", Spanish "Jose" or
Arabic "Khaled"  
  
  
The almost-consonant is the apostrophe This letter is pronounced like the
English letter H, but is only used between two vowels to prevent them from
running into each other. Thus **ui** is normally pronounced "we", but **u'i**
is "oohee". Groups of cmavo are called selma'o and are written using capital
letters; but unexpectedly the capital version of this letter is **h** not H
(ko'a is KOhA).

The combination **dj** is like the **j** in "joke". The combination **tc** is
like the **ch** in "chat".

The following sound as they do in English, with the exception that **r** is
often rolled (but does not have to be):

**b** , **d** , **f** , **k** , **l** , **m** , **n** , **p** , **r** , **s**
, **t** , **v** , **z**.

### Letter names

Speaking of the letters, what are the names for them? For example, when
reciting the alphabet in English the letter C is pronounced "see". This is
rather different than the sound the letter makes when used in a word. How
about Lojban? Well, consonants are straightforward: The name of a consonant
letter is the sound of that letter, plus **y**. So the consonant letters of
Lojban, "b, c, d, f, g ...", are called **by cy dy fy gy** in Lojban. The
almost-consonant **'** is called **.y'y** (pronounced like an agreeing uh-huh
but without the stress).

Vowels are handled by following the vowel sound with the word **bu** , which
signifies we're speaking about a symbol. So the vowels of Lojban are: **.abu
.ebu .ibu .obu .ubu and .ybu**.

Lastly you should know that stress is placed on the second-to-last syllable in
words with more than one syllable, ignoring syllables containing **y** , and
that one-syllable words are not stressed.

### Correct pronunciation

You don't have to be very precise about Lojban pronunciation, because the
phonemes are distributed so that it is hard to mistake one sound for another.
This means that rather than one 'correct' pronunciation, there is a range of
acceptable pronunciationâthe general principle is that anything is OK so long
as it doesn't sound too much like something else. For example, Lojban **r**
can be pronounced like the "R" in English, Scottish or French.

Two things to be careful of, though, are pronouncing Lojban **i** and **u**
like Standard British English "hit" and "but" (Northern English "but" is
fine!). This is because non-Lojban vowels, particularly these two, are used to
separate consonants by people who find them hard to say. For example, if you
have problems spitting out the **zd** in **zdani** (house), you can say
**zÉªdani** â where the **Éª** is very short, but the final **i** has to be
long.

### Writing Lojban

As you have already seen, Lojban uses the Latin alphabet, though various
Lojbanists have suggested different, usually self-designed ones. Furthermore,
Lojban almost always uses lower-case letters. Capital letters are only used to
mark stress in proper names, but people tend to avoid them even in names.

Apart from the letters, some punctuation is used:

A full stop (period) is a glottal stop (the consonant in the middle of "uh-
oh") or a short pause. The rules of Lojban make it easier for one word to run
into another when the second word begins with a vowel; so any word starting
with a vowel conventionally has a full stop placed in front of it. Full stops
are not usually used to end sentences.

Commas are rare in Lojban. They are only used to emphasize boundaries between
syllables, and adding or removing commas never changes a word's pronunciation
or meaning.

The following are found writing styles of different Lojbanists, but they are
not conventional:

Spaces are usually used between words. They are mandatory between some words
(more on that in lesson thirteen). Double or triple space is sometimes used
before the beginning of new sentences. This is to clearly mark sentence shift
visually. This might compensate for lack of capital letters which are used for
the same purpose in English.

In Ã²rder to visuÃ lly reprÃ¨sent the stress on the penultÃ¬mate syllÃ ble, and
bÃ¨cause they find it visuÃ lly plÃ¨asing, some pÃ¨ople use grave or acute Ã ccents
Ã²ver the vÃ²wel of those syllÃ bles.

Some people borrow other punctuation marks from English, even though they are
not canon, and Lojban is equipped with actual words which should compensate
for any punctuation one might want to use. Nonetheless, question marks, for
example, clearly marks a sentence as a question and is much easier to catch
with the eye than any word is, and so some Lojbanists use them. Quotation
marks, parenthesis and exclamations marks can be used similarly. While this is
not ungrammatical, since that doesn't interfere with the sentences, some
people think exotic punctuation creates an unwanted difference between written
and spoken Lojban, generally a big no-no.

### Lojbanized foreign proper names (cmevla)

The following names are Lojbanized - their sounds are transcribed into Lojban
and their ending sound have been changed to a consonant. The final consonant
is necessary, because that's how foreign names are differentiated from Lojban
words. Again, more on that in lesson thirteen.

_Exercise 1_

Where are these places?

  1. .nuIORK.
  2. .romas.
  3. .xavanas.
  4. .kardif.
  5. .beidjin.
  6. .ANkaras.
  7. .ALbekerkis.
  8. .vankuver.
  9. .keiptaun.
  10. .taibeis.
  11. .bon.
  12. .delis.
  13. .nis.
  14. .atinas.
  15. .lidz.
  16. .xelsinkis.

Answer:

  1. New York: USA
  2. Rome: Italy
  3. Havana: Cuba
  4. Cardiff: Wales (The Welsh for "Cardiff" is "Caerdydd", which would Lojbanise to something like kairdyd..)
  5. Beijing: China
  6. Ankara: Turkey
  7. Albequerque: New Mexico, USA
  8. Vancouver: Canada
  9. Cape Town: South Africa
  10. Taipei: Taiwan (note b, not p. Although actually, the b in Pinyin is pronounced as a p... But this isn't meant to be a course on Mandarin!)
  11. Bonn: Germany
  12. Delhi: India (The Hindi for "Delhi" is "DillÃ®", which would give dilis. or dili'is..)
  13. Nice: France
  14. Athens: Greece ("Athina" in Greek)
  15. Leeds: England
  16. Helsinki: Finland

_Exercise 2_

Lojbanise the following names.

There are usually alternative spellings for names, either because people
pronounce the originals differently, or because the exact sound doesn't exist
in Lojban, so you need to choose between two Lojban letters. This doesn't
matter, so long as everyone knows who or where you're talking about.

  1. John
  2. Melissa
  3. Amanda
  4. Matthew
  5. Michael
  6. David Bowie
  7. Jane Austen
  8. William Shakespeare
  9. Sigourney Weaver
  10. Richard Nixon
  11. Istanbul
  12. Madrid
  13. Tokyo
  14. San Salvador

Answer:

  1. .djon. (or .djan. with some accents)
  2. .melisys.
  3. .amandys. (again, depending on your accent, the final y may be a, the initial a may be y, and the middle a may be e.)
  4. .matiius.
  5. .maikyl. or .maikl. , depending on how you say it.
  6. .deivyd.bauis. or .bouis.
  7. .djein.ostin.
  8. .uiliiam.cekspir.
  9. .sigornis.uivyr. or .sygornis.uivyr.
  10. .ritcyrd.niksyn.
  11. .istanBUL. with English stress, .IStanbul. with American, .istanbul. with Turkish. Lojbanists generally prefer to base cmevla on local pronunciation, but this is not an absolute rule.
  12. .maDRID.
  13. .tokiios.
  14. .san.salvaDOR. (with Spanish stress)

# Lessons

## Lesson 1: Bridi, jufra, sumti and selbri

**Bridi** is the most central unit of Lojban utterances. The concept is very
close to what we call a proposition in English. A bridi is a claim that some
objects stand in a relation to each other, or that an object has some
property. This stands in contrast to **jufra** , which are merely Lojban
utterances, which can be bridi or anything else being said. The difference
between a bridi and a jufra is that a jufra does not necessarily state
anything, while a bridi does. Thus, a bridi might be true or false, while not
all jufra can be said to be such.

To have some examples (in English, to begin with), _Mozart was the greatest
musician of all time_ is a bridi, because it makes a claim with a truth value,
and it involves an object, Mozart, and a property, being the greatest musician
of all time. On the contrary, _Ow! My toe!_ is not a bridi, since it does not
involve a relation, and thus does not state anything. Both, though, are jufra.

Try to identify the bridi among these English jufra:

  1. _I hate it when you do that._
  2. _Woah, that looks delicious!_
  3. _Geez, not again._
  4. _No, I own three cars_
  5. _Nineteen minutes past eight._
  6. _This Saturday, yes._

Answer: 1, 2 and 4 are bridi. The rest contain no relation or claim of a
property.

Put in Lojban terms, a bridi consists of one **selbri** , and one or more
**sumti**. The selbri is the relation or claim about the object, and the sumti
are the objects which are in a relation. Note that _object_ is not a perfect
translation of **sumti** , since sumti can refer to not just physical objects,
but can also purely abstract things like "_The idea of warfare_ ". A better
translation would be something like "_subject, direct or indirect object_ "
for **sumti** , and _main verb_ for **selbri** , though, as we will see, this
is not optimal either.

We can now write the first important lesson down:

bridi = selbri + one or more sumti

  

Put another way, a bridi states that some sumti do/are something explained by
a selbri.

Identify the sumti and selbri equivalents in these English jufra:

> I will pick up my daughters with my car.

Answer: selbri: _pick up (with)_. sumti: _I_ , _my daughters_ , _my car_

> He bought 5 new shirts from Mark for just two hundred euro!

Answer: selbri: _bought (from) (for)_ sumti: _He_ , _5 new shirts_ , _Mark_
and _two hundred euros_

Since these concepts are so fundamental to Lojban, let's have a third example:

> So far, the EPA has done nothing about the amount of sulphur dioxide.

Answer: selbri: _has done (about)_ sumti: _The EPA_ , _nothing_ and _the
amount of sulphur dioxide_

Now try begin making Lojban bridi. For this you will need to use some words,
which can act as selbri:

    **dunda** = _x 1 gives x2 to x3 (without payment)_
    **pelxu** = _x 1 is yellow_
    **zdani** = _x 1 is a home of x2_

Notice that these words meaning _give_ , _yellow_ and _home_ would be
considered a verb, an adjective and a noun in English. In Lojban, there are no
such categories and no such distinction. **dunda** can be translated _gives_
(verb), _is a giver_ (noun), _is giving_ (adjective) as well as to an adverb
form. They all act as selbri, and are used in the same way.

As well as a few words, which can act as sumti:

    **mi** = _"I" or "we" â the one or those who are speaking_
    **ti** = _"this" â a close thing or event nearby which can be pointed to by the speaker_
    **do** = _"you" â the one or those who are being spoken to_

See the strange translations of the selbri above - especially the x1, x2 and
x3? Those are called sumti places. They are places where sumti can go to fill
a bridi. Filling a sumti in a place states that the sumti fits in that place.
The second place of **dunda** , for example, x2, is the thing being given. The
third is the object which receives the thing. Notice also that the translation
of **dunda** has the word _to_ in it. This is because, while this word is
needed in English to signify the receiver, the receiver is in the third sumti
place of **dunda**. So when you fill the third sumti place of **dunda** , the
sumti you fill in is always the receiver, and you don't need an equivalent to
the word _to_!

To say a bridi, you simply say the x1 sumti first, then the selbri, then any
other sumti.

Usual bridi: (x1 sumti) _(selbri)_ (x2 sumti) (x3 sumti) (x4 sumti) (x5 sumti)
(and so on)

The order can be played around with, but for now, we stick with the usual
form. To say _I give this to you_ you just say **mi dunda ti do** , with the
three sumti at the right places.

So, how would you say _This is a home of me_?

Answer: **ti zdani mi**

Try a few more in order to get the idea of a place structure sink in.

_You give this to me_?

Answer: **do dunda ti mi**

And translate **ti pelxu**

Answer: _This is yellow._

Quite easy once you get the hang of it, right?

Multiple bridi after each other are separated by **.i** This is the Lojban
equivalent of full stop, but it usually goes before bridi instead of after
them. It's often left out before the first bridi, though, as in all these
examples:

    **.i** = _Sentence separator. Separates any two jufra (and therefore also bridi)._

**ti zdani mi .i ti pelxu** _This is a home to me. This is yellow._

Before you move on to the next lesson, I recommend that you take a break for
at least seven minutes to let the information sink in.

## Lesson 2: Skipping around with **FA** and **zo'e**

Most selbri have from one to five sumti places, but some have more. Here is a
selbri with four sumti places:

    **vecnu** = _x 1 sells x2 to x3 for price x4_

If I want to say _I sell this_ , it would be too much to have to fill the
sumti places x3 and x4, which specify who I sell the thing to, and for what
price. Luckily, I don't need to. sumti places can be filled with **zo'e**.
**zo'e** indicates to us that the value of the sumti place is unspecified
because it's unimportant or can be determined from context.

    **zo'e** = _something; fills a sumti place with something, but does not state what._

So to say _I sell to you_ , I could say

**mi vecnu zo'e do zo'e**  
 _I sell something to you for some price._  
---  
  
How would you say: _That's a home (for somebody)_?

Answer:  **ti zdani zo'e**

How about _(someone) gives this to (someone)_?

Answer: **zo'e dunda ti zo'e**

Still, filling out three **zo'e** just to say that a thing is being sold takes
time. Therefore you don't need to write all the **zo'e** in a bridi. The rule
simply is that if you leave out any sumti, they will be considered as if they
contained **zo'e**. If the bridi begins with a selbri, the x1 is presumed to
be omitted and it becomes **zo'e**.

Try it out. What's Lojban for _I sell_?

Answer: **mi vecnu**

And what does **zdani mi** mean?

Answer: _Something is a home of me_ or just _I have a home._

As mentioned earlier, the form doesn't have to be {x1 sumti} {selbri} {x2
sumti} {x3 sumti} (ect.) In fact, you can place the selbri anywhere you want,
just not at the beginning of the bridi. If you do that, the x1 is considered
left out and filled with **zo'e** instead. So the following three jufra are
all the exactly same bridi:

  * **mi dunda ti do**
  * **mi ti dunda do**
  * **mi ti do dunda**

Sometimes this is used for poetic effect. _You sell yourself_ could be **do do
vecnu** , which sounds better than **do vecnu do**. Or it can be used for
clarity if the selbri is very long and therefore better be left at the end of
the bridi.

There are also several ways to play around with the order of the sumti inside
the bridi. The easiest one is by using the words **fa** , **fe** , **fi** ,
**fo** and **fu**.

    **fa** = _Tags the following sumti as filling x 1_
    **fe** = _Tags the following sumti as filling x 2_
    **fi** = _Tags the following sumti as filling x 3_
    **fo** = _Tags the following sumti as filling x 4_
    **fu** = _Tags the following sumti as filling x 5_

Notice that the vowels are the five vowels in the Lojban alphabet in order.
Using one of these words marks that the next sumti will fill the x1, x2, x3,
x4 and x5 respectively. The next sumti after that will be presumed to fill a
slot one greater than the previous. To use an example:

**dunda fa do fe ti do** â _Giving by you of this thing to you_. **fa** marks
the x1, the giver, which is you. **fe** marks the thing being given, the x2.
Sumti counting then continues from **fe** , meaning that the last sumti fills
x3, the object receiving.

Attempt to translate the following three sentences:

**mi vecnu fo ti fe do**

Answer: _I sell, for the price of this, you_. or _I sell you for the price of
this_ (probably pointing to a bunch of money)

**zdani fe ti**

Answer: _This has a home_. Here, the fe is redundant.

**vecnu zo'e mi ti fa do**

Answer: _You sell something to me for this price_

## Lesson 3: tanru and **lo**

In this lesson, you will become familiar with the concept of a **tanru**. A
tanru is formed when a selbri is put in front of another selbri, modifying its
meaning. A tanru is itself a selbri, and can combine with other selbri or
tanru to form more complex tanru. Thus **zdani vecnu** is a tanru, as well as
**pelxu zdani vecnu** , which is made from the tanru **pelxu zdani** and the
single brivla word **vecnu**. To understand the concept of tanru, consider the
English noun combination _lemon tree_. If you didn't know what a lemon tree
was, but had heard about both lemons and trees, you would not be able to
deduce what a lemon tree was. Perhaps a lemon-colored tree, or a tree shaped
like a lemon, or a tree whose bark tastes like lemon. The only things you
could know for sure would be that it would be a tree, and it would be lemon-
like in some way.

A tanru is closely analogous to this. It cannot be said exactly what a **zdani
vecnu** is, but it can be said that it is definitely a **vecnu** , and that
it's **zdani** -like in some way. And it could be **zdani** -like in any way.
In theory, no matter how silly or absurd the connection to **zdani** was, it
could still truly be a **zdani vecnu**. However, it must actually be a
**vecnu** in the ordinary sense in order for the tanru to apply. You could
gloss **zdani vecnu** as _home seller_ , or even better but worse sounding _a
home-type-of seller_. The place structure of a tanru is always that of the
rightmost selbri. It's also said that the left selbri modifies the right
selbri.

"Really?", you'd ask, skeptically, "It doesn't matter how silly the connection
to the left word in a tanru is, it's still true? So I could call all sellers
for **zdani vecnu** and then make up some silly excuse why I think it's zdani-
like?"

Well yes, but then you'd be a dick. Or at least you'd be intentionally
misleading. In general, you should use a tanru when it's obvious how the left
word relates to the right.

Attempt to translate the following: **ti pelxu zdani do**

Answer: _That is a yellow home for you_ Again, we don't know in which way it's
yellow. Probably it's painted yellow, but we don't know for sure.

**mi vecnu dunda**

Answer: _I sell-like give_. What can that mean? No idea. It certainly doesn't
mean that you sold something, since, by definition of **dunda** , there can be
no payment involved. It has to be a giveaway, but be sell-like in some aspect.

And now for something completely different. What if I wanted to say I sold to
a German?

    **dotco** = _x 1 is German/reflects German culture in aspect x2_

I can't say **mi vecnu zo'e dotco** because that would leave two selbri in a
bridi, which is not permitted. I could say **mi dotco vecnu** but that would
be unnecessary vague - I could sell in a German way. Likewise, if I want to
say _I am friends with an American_ , what should I say?

    **pendo** = _x 1 is a friend of x2_
    **merko** = _x 1 is American/reflect US culture in aspect x2_

Again, the obvious would be to say **mi pendo merko** , but that would form a
tanru, meaning _I am friend-like American_ , which is wrong. What we really
want to is to take the selbri **merko** and transform it into a sumti so it
can be used in the selbri **pendo**. This is done by the two words **lo** and
**ku**.

    **lo** = _generic begin convert selbri to sumti word. Extracts x 1 of selbri to use as sumti._
    **ku** = _end convert selbri to sumti process._

You simply place a selbri between these two words, and it takes anything that
can fill the x1 of that selbri and turns it into a sumti.

So for instance, the things that can fill **zdani'** s x1 are only things
which are homes of somebody. So **lo zdani ku** means _a home or some homes
for somebody._ Similarly, if I say that something is **pelxu** , it means it's
yellow. So **lo pelxu ku** refers to something yellow.

Now you have the necessary grammar to be able to say _I am friends with an
American._ How?

Answer: **mi pendo lo merko ku**

There is a good reason why the **ku** is necessary. Try to translate _A German
sells this to me_

Answer: **lo dotco ku vecnu ti mi** If you leave out the ku, you do not get a
bridi, but simply three sumti. Since loâ¦ku cannot convert bridi, the ti is
forced outside the sumti, the lo-construct is forced to close and it simply
becomes the three sumti of **lo dotco vecnu {ku}** , **ti** and **mi**.

You always have to be careful with jufra like **lo zdani ku pelxu**. If the
**ku** is left out the conversion process does not end, and it simply becomes
one sumti, made from the tanru **zdani pelxu** and then converted with **lo**.

## Lesson 4: Attitudinals

Another concept which can be unfamiliar to English speakers is that of
attitudinals. Attitudinals are words that express emotions directly. They
turned out to be incredibly awesome and useful. They all have a so-called free
grammar, which means that they can appear almost anywhere within bridi without
disrupting the bridi's grammar or any grammatical constructs.

In Lojban grammar, an attitudinal applies to the previous word. If that
previous word is a word which begins a construct (like **.i** or **lo**), it
applies to the entire construct. Likewise, if the attitudinal follows a word
which ends a construct like **ku** , it applies to the ended construct.

Let's have two attitudinals to make some examples:

    **ui** = _attitudinal: simple pure emotion: happiness - unhappiness_
    **za'a** = _attitudinal: evidential: I directly observe_

Note that in the definition of **ui** , there are listed two emotions,
happiness and unhappiness. This means that **ui** is defined as happiness,
while its _negation_ , means unhappiness. _Negation_ might be the wrong word
here. Technically, the other definition of **ui** is another construct, **ui
nai**. Most of the time, the second definition of attitudinals - the ones
suffixed with **nai** \- really is the negation of the bare attitudinal. Other
times, not so much.

    **nai** = _misc. negation - attached to attitudinals, it changes the meaning into the attitudinal's "negation"_

And some more selbri, just for the heck of it:

    **citka** = _x 1 eats x2_
    **plise** = _x 1 is an apple of strain/type x2_

The sentence **do citka lo plise ku ui** , means _You eat an apple, yay!_
(especially expressing that it is the _apple_ that the speaker is happy about,
not the eating, or the fact that it was you.) In the sentence **do za'a citka
lo plise ku** , the speaker directly observes that it is indeed the __you__ ,
who eats an apple as opposed to someone else.

If an attitudinal is placed at the beginning of the bridi, it is understood to
apply to an explicit or implicit **.i** , thus applying to the entire bridi:

**ui za'a do dunda lo plise ku mi** â _Yay, I observe that you give an/some
apple to me!_

**mi vecnu ui nai lo zdani ku** _I sell (which sucks!) a home_.

Try it out with a few examples. First, though, here are some more
attitudinals:

    **.u'u** = _attitudinal: simple pure emotion: guilt - remorselessness - innocence._
    **.oi** = _attitudinal: complex pure emotion: complaint - pleasure._
    **iu** = _attitudinal: miscellaneous pure emotion: love - hate._

Look at that, a word with three emotions in the definition! The middle one is
accessed by suffixinng with **cu'i**. It's considered the midpoint of the
emotion.

    **cu'i** = _attitudinal midpoint scalar: attach to attitudinal to change the meaning to the "midpoint" of the emotion._

Try saying _I give something to a German, who I love_

Answer: **mi dunda fi lo dotco ku iu** or **zo'e** instead of **fi**

Now _Aah, I eat a yellow apple_

Answer: **.oi nai mi citka lo pelxu plise ku**

Let's have another attitudinal of a different kind to illustrate something
peculiar:

    **.ei** = _attitudinal: complex propositional emotion: obligation - freedom._

So, quite easy: _I have to give the apple away_ is **mi dunda .ei lo plise
ku** , right? It is, actually! When you think about it, that's weird. Why is
it that all the other attitudinals we have seen so far expresses the speaker's
feeling about the bridi, but this one actually changes what the bridi means?
Surely, by saying _I have to give the apple away_ , we say nothing about
whether the apple actually is being given away. If I had used **ui** ,
however, I would actually have stated that I gave the apple away, and that I
was happy about it. What's that all about?

This issue, exactly how attitudinals change the conditions on which a bridi is
true, is a subject of a minor debate. The official, _textbook_ rule, which
probably won't be changed, is that there is a distinction between _pure
emotions_ and _propositional emotions_. Only propostional emotions can change
the truth conditions, while pure emotions cannot. In order to express a
propositional emotional attitudinal without changing the truth value of the
bridi, you can just separate it from the bridi with **.i**. There is also a
word for explicitly conserving or changing the truth conditions of a bridi:

    **da'i** = _attitudinal: discursive: supposing - in fact_

Saying **da'i** in a bridi changes the truth conditions to hypothetical, which
is the default using propositional attitudinals. Saying **da'i nai** changes
the truth condition to the normal, which is default using pure attitudinals.

So, what's two ways of saying _I give the apple away_? (and feel obligation
about it)

Answer: **mi dunda lo plise ku .i .ei** and **mi dunda da'i nai .ei lo plise
ku**

The feeling of an attitudinal can be subscribed to someone else using **dai**.
Usually in ordinary speech, the attitudinal is subscribed to the listener, but
it doesn't have to be so. Also, because the word is glossed _empathy_ (feeling
others emotions), some Lojbanists mistakenly think that the speaker must share
the emotion being subscribed to others.

    **dai** = _attitudinal modifier: empathy (subscribes attitudinal to someone else, unspecified)_

Example: **.u'i .oi dai citka ti** \- _Ha ha, this was eaten! That must have
hurt!_

    **.u'i** = _attitudinal: simple pure emotion: amusement - weariness_

What often used phrase could **.oi .u'i dai** mean?

Answer: _Ouch, very funny._

And another one to test your knowledge: Try to translate _He was sorry he sold
a home_ (remembering, that tense is implied and need not be specified. Also,
_he_ could be obvious from context)

Answer: **u'u dai vecnu lo zdani ku**

Lastly, the intensity of an attitudinal can be specified using certain words.
These can be used after an attitudinal, or an attitudinal with **nai** or
**cu'i** suffixed. It's less clear what happens when you attach it to other
words, like a selbri, but it's mostly understood as intensifying or weakening
the selbri in some unspecified way:

Modifying word  | Intensity   
---|---  
cai  | Extreme   
sai  | Strong   
(none)  | Unspecified (medium)   
ru'e  | Weak   
  
  

What emotion is expressed using **.u'i nai sai** ?

Answer: Strong weariness

And how would you express that you are mildly remorseless?

Answer: **.u'u cu'i ru'e**

## Lesson 5: Reordering places with **SE**

Before we venture into the territory of more complex constructs, you should
learn another mechanism for reordering the sumti of a selbri. This, as we will
show, is very useful for making description-like sumti (the kind of sumti with
**lo**).

Consider the sentence _I eat a gift_ , which might be appropriate if that gift
is an apple. To translate this, it would seem natural to look up a selbri
meaning _gift_ before continuing. However, if one looks carefully at the
definition of **dunda** , x1 gives x2 to x3, one realizes that the x2 of
**dunda** is something given â a gift.

So, to express that sentence, we can't say **mi citka lo dunda ku** , because
**lo dunda ku** would be the x1 of **dunda** , which is a donor of a gift.
Cannibalism aside, we don't want to say that. What we want is a way to extract
the x2 of a selbri.

This is one example where it is useful to use the word **se**. What **se**
does is to modify a selbri such that the x1 and x2 of that selbri trade
places. The construct of **se** \+ selbri is on its own considered one selbri.
Let's try with an ordinary sentence:

_ti se fanva mi = mi fanva ti_  
` This is translated by me (= I translate this). [literally]`  
---  
  
    **fanva** = _x 1 translates x2 to language x3 from language x4 with result of translation x5_

Often, but not always, bridi with **se** -constructs are translated to
sentences with the passive voice, since the x1 is often the object taking
action.

**se** has its own family of words. All of them swap a different place with
the x1.

se  | swap x1 and x2   
---|---  
te  | swap x1 and x3   
ve  | swap x1 and x4   
xe  | swap x1 and x5   
  
Note that **s** , **t** , **v** , and **x** are consecutive consonants in the
Lojban alphabet.

So: Using this knowledge, what would **ti xe fanva ti** mean?

Answer: _This is a translation of this_ (or **fanva ti fu ti**)

**se** and its family can of course be combined with **fa** and its family.
The result can be very confusing indeed, if you wish to make it so:

    **klama** = _x 1 travels/goes to x2 from x3 via x4 using x5 as transportation device_

**fo lo zdani ku te klama fe do ti fa mi** = **mi te klama do ti lo zdani ku**
and since **te** exchanges x1 and x3: = **ti klama do mi lo zdani ku** = _This
travels to you from me via a home._

Of course, no one would make such a sentence except to confuse people, or
cruelly to test their understanding of Lojban grammar.

And thus, we have come to the point where we can say _I eat a gift._. Simply
exchange the sumti places of **dunda** to get the gift to be x1, then extract
this new x1 with **lo**...**ku**. So, how would you say it?

One (possible) answer: **mi citka lo se dunda ku**

This shows one of the many uses for **se** and its family.

## Lesson 6: Abstractions

So far we have only expressed single sentences one at a time. To express more
complex things, however, you often need subordinate sentences. Luckily, these
are much easier in Lojban than what one would expect.

We can begin with an example to demonstrate this:

> I am happy that you are my friend.

Here, the main bridi is _I am happy that X._ , and the sub-bridi is _You are
my friend._ Looking at the definition for _happy_ , which is **gleki**

    **gleki** = _x 1 is happy about x2 (event/state)_

we can see that the x2 needs to be an event or a state. This is natural,
because one cannot be happy about an object in itself, only about some state
the object is in. But alas! Only bridi can express a state or an event, and
only sumti can fill the x2 of **gleki**!

As you might have guessed, there is a solution. The words **su'u**...**kei**
is a generic _convert bridi to selbri_ function, and works just like **lo**
â¦**ku**.

    **su'u** = _x 1 is an abstraction of {bridi} of type x2_
    **kei** = _end abstraction_

Example:

**melbi su'u dansu kei**  
 _Beautiful dancing/Beautiful dance_  
---  
  
    **melbi** = _x 1 is beautiful to x2._
    **dansu** = _x 1 dances to accompaniment/music/rhythm x2._

It's usually hard to find good uses of a bridi as a selbri. However, since
**su'u BRIDI kei** is a selbri, one can convert it to a sumti using
**lo**...**ku**.

Now we have the equipment to express _I am happy that you are my friend_. Try
it out!

    **pendo** = _x 1 is a friend of x2_

Answer: **mi gleki lo su'u do pendo mi kei ku**

However, **su'u** â¦**kei** does not see much use. People prefer to use the
more specific words **nu** â¦**kei** and **du'u** â¦**kei**. They work the same
way, but mean something different. **nuâ¦kei** treats the bridi in between as
an event or state, and **du'uâ¦kei** treats it as an abstract bridi, for
expressing things like ideas, thoughts or truths. All these words (except
**kei**) are called abstractors. There are many of them, and only few are used
much. **su'uâ¦kei** is a general abstractor, and will work in all cases.

    **nu** = _x 1 is an event of (bridi)_
    **du'u** = _x 1 is the predication of (bridi), as expressed in sentence x2_

Use **nu** to say _I'm happy about talking to you._

    **tavla** = _x 1 talks to x2 about subject x3 in language x4._

Answer: **mi gleki lo nu tavla do kei ku** (notice both the English and the
Lojban is vague as to who is doing the talking).

Other important abstractors include: **ka...kei** (property/aspect
abstraction), **si'o...kei** (concept/idea abstraction), **ni...kei**
(quantity abstraction) among others. The meanings of these is a complicated
matter, and will be discussed much later, in lesson twenty-nine. For now,
you'll have to do without them.

It is important to notice that some abstractors have several sumti places. As
an example, **du'u** can be mentioned. **du'u** is defined:

    **du'u** = _abstractor. x 1 is the predicate/bridi of (bridi) expressed in sentence x2._

The other sumti places besides x1 is rarely used, but **lo se du'u (bridi) kei
ku** is sometimes used as a sumti for indirect quotation: _I said that I was
given a dog_ can be written **mi cusku lo se du'u mi te dunda lo gerku ku kei
ku** , if you will pardon the weird example.

    **cusku** = _x 1 expresses x2 to x3 through medium x4_
    **gerku** = _x 1 is a dog of race x2_

## Lesson 7: **NOI**

While we're at it, there's another type of subordinate bridi. These are called
_relative clauses_. They are sentences which add some description to a sumti.
Indeed, the "_which_ " in the previous sentence marked the beginning of a
relative clause in English describing relative clauses. In Lojban, they come
in two flavors, and it might be worth distinguishing the two kinds before
learning how to express them.

The two kinds are called restrictive and non-restrictive (or incidential)
relative clauses. An example would be good here:

> _My brother, who is two meters tall, is a politician._

This can be understood in two ways. I could have several brothers, in which
case saying he is two meters tall will let you know which brother I am talking
about. Or I might have only one brother, in which case I am simply giving you
additional information.

In English as well as Lojban we distinguish between these two kinds â the
first interpretation is restrictive (since it helps restrict the possible
brothers I might be talking about), the second non-restrictive. When speaking
English, context and tone of voice (or in written English, punctuation) helps
us distinguish between these two, but not so in Lojban. Lojban uses the
constructs **poiâ¦ku'o** and **noiâ¦ku'o** for restrictive and non-restrictive
relative clauses, respectively.

Let's have a Lojbanic example, which can also explain our strange gift-eating
behavior in the example in lesson five:

    **noi** = _begin non-restrictive relative clause (can only attach to sumti)_
    **poi** = _begin restrictive relative clause (can only attach to sumti)_
    **ku'o** = _end relative clause_
**mi citka lo se dunda ku poi plise ku'o**  
 _I eat the gift that (something is) an apple._  
---  
  
Here the **poiâ¦ku'o** is placed just after **lo se dunda ku** , so it applies
to the gift. To be strict, the relative clause does not specify what it is,
which is an apple, but given the context we can safely assume that it means
that the gift is an apple. If we want to be absolutely sure that it indeed was
the gift that was an apple, we use the word **ke'a** , which is a **sumka'i**
(a Lojban pronoun, more on them later) representing the sumti which the
relative clause is attached to. **ke'a** is often omitted for brevity when it
would be in the x1 place of the relative clause.

    **ke'a** = _sumka'i; refers to the sumti, to which the relative clause it attached._
**ui mi citka lo se dunda ku poi ke'a plise ku'o**  
 _Yay, I eat the gift that is an apple._  
---  
  
To underline the difference between restrictive and non-restrictive relative
clauses, here's another example:

    **lojbo** = _x 1 reflects Lojbanic culture/community is aspect x2; x1 is Lojbanic._
**mi noi lojbo ku'o fanva fo lo lojbo ku**  
 _I, who am a Lojbanic, translate from some Lojbanic language._  
---  
  
Here, there is not multiple things which **mi** could refer to, and the fact
that I am lojbanic is merely additional information not needed to identify me.
Therefore **noiâ¦ku'o** is appropriate.

See if you can translate this:

> _I flirt with the man who is beautiful/handsome._

    **nanmu** = _x 1 is a man_
    **melbi** = _x 1 is beautiful to x2 in aspect (ka) x3 by standard x4_
    **cinjikca** = _x 1 flirts/courts x2, exhibiting sexuality x3 by standard x4_

Answer: **mi cinjikca lo nanmu ku poi (ke'a) melbi ku'o**

On a more technical side note, it might be useful to know that **lo (selbri)
ku** is often seen defined as **zo'e noi ke'a (selbri) ku'o**.

Besides, it is also possible to connect two or more relative clauses to the
same sumti, by using the relative clause joiner **zi'e**. It's syntax is
"sumti + relative clause + **zi'e** \+ relative clause (+ **zi'e** \+ relative
clause (...))". Here is an example:

    **penmi** = _x 1 meets/encounters x2 at/in location x3_
    **dasni** = _x 1 wears/is robed/garbed in x2 as a garment of type x3_
**mi tavla lo nanmu ku poi do penmi ke'a ku'o zi'e noi dasni lo xunre ku
ku'o**  
 _I talked to the man that you met and which (incidentally) was dressed in
red._  
`... and which wears something red... [literally]`  
---  
  
## Lesson 8: Terminator elision

**je'u mi djica lo nu le merko poi tunba mi _vau ku'o ku_ jimpe lo du'u mi na
nelci lo nu ri darxi mi _vau kei ku vau kei ku vau kei ku vau_**  
 _I do wish the American, who is my sibling, would understand that I don't
like that he hits me._  
---  
  
Regardless of whether the above sentence is being understood, (it shouldn't,
as it contains words we have not covered in these lessons yet) one thing
stands out: As more complex Lojban structures are learned, more and more of
the sentences get filled with **ku** , **kei** , **ku'o** and other of those
words which by themselves carry no meaning.

The function of all these words is to signal the end of a certain grammatical
construct, like for instance _convert selbri to sumti_ in the case of **ku**.
The English word for this kind of word is _terminator_ , the Lojban word is
**famyma'o**. They are underlined in the example above.

Note: The **vau** in the above example are the famyma'o for _end bridi_. There
is a good reason you have not yet seen it, stay tuned.

    **vau** = _famyma'o: terminates bridi._

In most spoken and written Lojban, most famyma'o are skipped (elided). This
greatly saves syllables in speech and space in writing, however, one must
always be careful when eliding famyma'o. In the simple example **lo merko ku
klama** , removing the famyma'o **ku** would yield **lo merko klama** , which
is a single sumti made from the tanru **merko klama**. Thus, it means _an
American traveler_ instead of _an American travels_. famyma'o elision can lead
to very wrong results if done incorrectly, which is why you haven't learned
about it until now.

The rule for when famyma'o can be elided is very simple, at least in theory:
_You can elide a famyma'o,_if and only if_ doing so does not change the
grammatical constructs in the sentence._ In other words, a construct extends
as far right as possible, until either its famyma'o or another word not
allowed in the construct appears.

Most famyma'o can be safely elided at the end of the bridi. Exceptions are the
obvious ones like _end quote_ -famyma'o and _end bridi grouping_ -famyma'o.
This is why **vau** is almost never used â simply beginning a new bridi with
**.i** will almost always terminate the preceding bridi anyway. It has one
frequent use, however. Since attitudinals always apply to the preceding word,
applying it to a famyma'o applies it to the entire construct which is
terminated. Using **vau** , one can then use attitudinals afterthought and
apply them to the entire bridi:

**za'a do dunda lo zdani {ku} lo prenu {ku}... vau .i'e**  
 _I see that you give a home to a person... I approve!_  
---  
  
    **prenu** = _x 1 is a person; x1 has a personality._

Knowing the basic rules for famyma'o elision, we can thus return to the
original sentence and begin removing famyma'o:

**je'u mi djica lo nu le merko poi tunba mi _vau ku'o ku_ jimpe lo du'u mi na
nelci lo nu ri darxi mi _vau kei ku vau kei ku vau kei ku vau_**  
---  
  
We can see that the first **vau** is grammatically unnecessary, because the
next non-famyma'o-word is **jimpe** , which is a selbri. Since there can only
be one selbri per bridi, **vau** is not needed. Since **jimpe** as a selbri
cannot be in the relative clause either (only one bridi in a clause, only one
selbri in each bridi), we can elide **ku'o**. Likewise, **jimpe** cannot be a
second selbri inside the construct **le merko poi{...}** , so the **ku** is
not needed either. Furthermore, all the famyma'o at the very end of the
sentence can be elided too, since beginning a new bridi will terminate all of
these constructs anyway.

We then end up with:

**je'u mi djica lo nu le merko poi tunba mi jimpe lo du'u mi na nelci lo nu ri
darxi mi**  
---  
  
with no famyma'o at all!

When eliding famyma'o, it is a good idea to be acquainted with **cu**. **cu**
is one of those words which can make your (Lojbanic) life a lot easier. What
it does is to separate any previous sumti from the selbri. One could say that
it defines the next word to be a selbri, and terminates exactly as much as it
needs to in order to do that.

    **cu** = _elidable marker: separates selbri from preceding sumti, allows preceding famyma'o elision._
    **prami** = _x 1 loves x2_
**lo su'u do cusku lo se du'u do prami mi _vau kei ku vau kei ku_ se djica mi  
= lo su'u do cusku lo se du'u do prami mi _cu_ se djica mi**  
 _That you say that you love me is desired by be = I wish you said you loved
me._  
---  
  
Note: **cu** is not a famyma'o, because it is not tied to one specific
construct. But it can be used to elide other famyma'o.

One of the greatest strengths of **cu** is that it quickly becomes easy to
intuitively understand. By itself it means nothing, but it reveals the
structure of Lojban expressions by identifying the core selbri. In the
original example with the violent American brother, using **cu** before
**jimpe** does not change the meaning of the sentence in any way, but might
make it easier to read.

In the following couple of lessons, **cu** will be used when necessary, and
all famyma'o elided if possible. The elided famyma'o will be encased in curly
brackets, as shown below. Try to translate it!

**.a'o do noi ke'a lojbo .o'a dai {ku'o} cu jimpe lo du'u lo famyma'o {ku} cu
vajni {vau} {kei} {ku} {vau}**

    **vajni** = _x 1 is important to x2 for reason x3_
    **jimpe** = _x 1 understands that x2 (du'u-abstraction) is true about x3_
    **a'o** = _attitudinal: simple propositional emotion: Hope - despair_
    **o'a** = _attitudinal: simple propositional emotion: pride - modesty/humility - shame_
    **dai** = _attitudinal modifier: Empathy (subscribes attitudinal to someone else, unspecified)_

What do I state?

Answer: _I hope that you, a proud Lojbanist, understands that famyma'o are
important_

Fun side note: Most people well-versed in famyma'o-elision do it so
instinctively that they often must be reminded how important understanding
famyma'o are to the understanding of Lojban. Therefore, each Tuesday have been
designated _Terminator Day_ or **famyma'o djedi** on the Lojban IRC chatroom.
During Terminator Day, many people try (and often fail) to remember writing
out all famyma'o with some very verbose conversations as a result.

## Lesson 9: sumtcita

So far we have been doing pretty well with the selbri we have had at hand.
However, there is a finite amount of defined selbri out there, and in many
cases the sumti places are not useful for what we had in mind. What if, say, i
want to say that I am translating using a computer? There is no place in the
structure of **fanva** to specify what tool I translate with, since, most of
the time, that is not necessary. Not to worry, this lesson is on how to add
additional sumti places to the selbri.

The most basic way to add sumti places are with **fi'o SELBRI fe'u** (yes,
another example of a famyma'o, **fe'u**. It's almost never necessary, so this
might be the last time you ever see it.)

In between these two words goes a selbri, and like **lo SELBRI ku** , **fi'o
SELBRI fe'u** extracts the x1 of the selbri put into it. However, with **fi'o
SELBRI fe'u** , the selbri place is converted, not to a sumti, but to a
**sumtcita** , meaning _sumti-label_ , with the place structure of the x1 of
the selbri it converted. This **sumtcita** then absorbs the next sumti. One
could say that using a **sumtcita** , you import a sumti place from another
selbri, and add it to the bridi being said.

Note: Sometimes, especially in older texts, the term _tag_ or _modal_ is used
for **sumtcita**. Ignore those puny English expressions. We teach proper
Lojban here.

While it is hard to grasp the process from reading about it, an example can
perhaps show its actual simplicity:

    **skami** = _x 1 is a computer for purpose x2_
    **pilno** = _x 1 uses x2 as a tool for doing x3_

**mi fanva ti fi'o se pilno {fe'u} lo skami {ku}{vau}** \- _I translate this
with a computer_ The x2 of **pilno** , which is the x1 of **se pilno** is a
place structure for a tool being used by someone. This place structure is
captured by **fi'o SELBRI fe'u** , added to the main selbri, and then filled
by **lo skami**. The idea of **sumtcita** is sometimes expressed in English
using the following translation:

_I translate this with-tool: A computer_

A **sumtcita** can only absorb one sumti, which is always the following one.
Alternatively, one can use the **sumtcita** construct by itself without sumti.
In this case you need to put it either before the selbri or terminate it with
**ku**. In such case one can think as if the sumtcita has the word **zo'e** as
the sumti.

    **zukte** = _x 1 is a volitional entity carrying out action x2 for purpose x3_
    **zarci** = _x 1 is a market/store/exchange/shop(s) selling/trading (for) x2, operated by/with participants x3_

**fi'o zukte {fe'u} ku lo prenu {ku} cu klama lo zarci {ku}{vau}** \- _By
their own volition, a person is going to the store_

Note that there is **ku** in **fi'o zukte {fe'u} ku**. Without it the sumtcita
would have absorbed **lo prenu {ku}** and we don't want that.

We can say the same in other words:

**fi'o zukte {fe'u} zo'e lo prenu {ku} cu klama lo zarci {ku}{vau}**

**lo prenu {ku} cu fi'o zukte fe'u klama lo zarci {ku}{vau}**

retaining the meaning.

What does **mi jimpe fi lo skami fi'o se tavla {fe'u} mi** state?

Answer: _I understand something about computers, spoken to me_

Putting the **sumtcita** right in front of the selbri also makes it self-
terminate, since sumtcita only can absorb sumti, and not selbri. This fact
will be of importance in next lesson, as you will see.

Actually, **fi'o** is not used very often despite its flexibility. What IS
used very often, though, are BAI. BAI is a class of Lojban words, which in
themselves act as **sumtcita**. An example of this is **zu'e** , the BAI for
**zukte**. Grammatically, **zu'e** is the same as **fi'o zukte fe'u**. Thus,
the above example could be reduced to:

**zu'e ku lo prenu {ku} cu klama lo zarci {ku}{vau}**. There exist something
like 60 BAI, and a lot of these are very useful indeed. Furtermore, BAI can
also be converted with **se** and friends, meaning that **se zu'e** is equal
to **fi'o se zukte fe'u** , which results in a great deal more BAI.

## Lesson 10: **PU** , **FAhA** , **ZI** , **VA** , **ZEhA** , **VEhA**

How unfamiliar a language like Lojban must seem to an English-speaker, when
one can read through nine lessons of Lojban grammar without meeting a tense
once! This is because, unlike many natural languages (most Indo-European ones,
for instance), all tenses in Lojban are optional. Saying **mi citka lo cirla
{ku}** can mean _I eat cheese_ or _I ate the cheese_ or _I always eat cheese_
or _In a moment, i will have just finished eating cheese_. Context resolves
what is correct, and in most conversation, tenses are not needed at all.
However, when it's needed it's needed, and it must be taught. Furthermore,
Lojban tenses are unusual because they treat time and space fundamentally the
same - saying that I worked a long time ago is not grammatically different
than saying I work far away to the north.

Like many other languages, the Lojban tense system is perhaps the most
difficult part of the language. Unlike many other languages though, it's
perfectly regular and makes sense. So fear not, for it will not involve
sweating to learn how to modify the selbri or anything silly like that.

No, in the Lojban tense system, all tenses are sumtcita, which we have
conveniently just made ourselves familiar with. Okay okay, technically, tenses
are slightly different from other sumtcita, but this difference is almost
insignificant, and won't be explained until later. In most aspects they are
like all other sumtcita; they are terminated by **ku** , making it explicit
that PU is terminated by **ku**.

There are many different kinds of tense-sumtcita, so let's start at the ones
most familiar to English-speakers.

    **pu** = _sumtcita: before {sumti}_
    **ca** = _sumtcita: at the same time as {sumti}_
    **ba** = _sumtcita: after {sumti}_

These are like the English concepts _before_ , _now_ and _after_. In actuality
though, one could argue that two point-like events can never occur exactly
simultaneously, rendering **ca** useless. But **ca** extends slightly into the
past and the future, meaning just _about now_. This is because human beings
don't perceive time in a perfectly logical way, and the Lojban tense system
reflects that.

Side note: It was actually suggested making the Lojban tense system
relativistic. That idea, however, was dropped, because it is counter-
intuitive, and would mean that to learn Lojban, one would have to learn the
theory of relativity first.

So, how would you say _I express this (pointing to a paper) after I came to
this place?_

Answer: **mi cusku ti ba lo nu mi klama ti {vau} {kei} {ku} {vau}**

Usually when speaking, we do not need to specify which event in the past this
action is relative to. In: _I gave a computer away_ , we can assume that the
action happened relative to _now_ , and thus we can elide the sumti of the
sumtcita, because it's obvious:

**pu ku mi dunda lo skami {ku} {vau}** or

**mi dunda lo skami {ku} pu {ku} {vau}** or, more commonly

**mi pu {ku} dunda lo skami {ku} {vau}**. The sumti which fills the sumtcita
is an implied **zo'e** , which is almost always understood as relative to the
speaker's time and place (this is especially important when speaking about
left and right). If speaking about some events that happened some other time
than the present, it is sometimes assumed that all tenses are relative to that
event which is being spoken about. In order to clarify that all tenses are
relative to the speaker's current position, the word **nau** can be used at
any time. Another word, **ki** marks a tense which is then considered the new
standard. That will be taught way later.

    **nau** = _updates temporal and spacial frame of reference to the speaker's current here and now._
    **gugde** = _x 1 is the country of people x2 with land/territory x3_

Also note that **mi pu {ku} klama lo merko gugde {ku} {vau}** , _I went to
America_ , does not imply that I'm not still traveling to USA, only that it
was also true some time in the past, for instance five minutes ago.

As mentioned, spacial and temporal time tenses are very much alike. Contrast
the previous three time tenses with these four spacial tenses:

    **zu'a** = _sumtcita: left of {sumti}_
    **ca'u** = _sumtcita: in front of {sumti}_
    **ri'u** = _sumtcita: right of {sumti}_
    **bu'u** = _sumtcita: at the same place as {sumti} (spacial equivalent of**ca**)_
    **.o'o** = _attitudinal: complex pure emotion: patience - tolerance - anger_

What would **.o'o nai ri'u ku lo prenu {ku} cu darxi lo gerku {ku} pu {ku}
{vau}** mean?

    **darxi** = _x 1 beats/hits x2 with instrument x3 at locus x4_

Answer: _{anger!} To the right (of something, probably me) and in the past (of
some event), something is an event of a person beating a dog._ or _A man hit a
dog to my right!_

If there are several tense sumtcita in one bridi, the rule is that you read
them from left to right, thinking it as a so called _imaginary journey_ ,
Where you begin at an implied point in time and space (default: the speaker's
now and here), and then follow the sumtcita one at a time from left to right.

Example

**mi pu {ku} ba {ku} jimpe fi lo lojbo famyma'o {ku} {vau}** = _At some time
in the past, I will be about to know about famyma'os._

**mi ba {ku} pu {ku} jimpe fi lo lojbo famyma'o {ku} {vau}** _At some point in
the future, I will have understood about famyma'os._

Since we do not specify the amount of time we move back or forth, the
understanding could in both cases happen in the future or the past of the
point of reference.

Also, if spacial and temporal tenses are mixed, the rule is to always put
temporal before spacial.

Suppose we want to specify that the a man hit a dog just a minute ago. The
words **zi** , **za** and **zu** specifies a short, unspecified (presumably
medium) and long distance in time. Notice the vowel order **i** , **a** and
**u**. This order appears again and again in Lojban, and might be worth to
memorize. _Short_ and _long_ in are always context dependent, relative and
subjective. Two hundred years is a short time for a species to evolve, but a
long time to wait for the bus.

    **zi** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the small distance of {sumti} in time from point of reference_
    **za** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the unspecified(medium) distance of {sumti} in time from point of reference_
    **zu** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the far distance of {sumti} in time from the point of reference_

Similarly, spacial distance is marked by **vi** , **va** and **vu** for short,
unspecified (medium) and long distance in space.

    **vi** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the small distance of {sumti} in space from point of reference_
    **va** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the unspecified(medium) distance of {sumti} in space from point of reference_
    **vu** = _sumtcita: Ocurring the far distance of {sumti} in space from the point of reference_
    **gunka** = _x 1 works at x2 with objective x3_

Translate: **ba {ku} za ku mi vu {ku} gunka {vau}**

Answer: _Some time in the future, I will work a place far away_

Note: People rarely use **zi** , **za** or **zu** without a **pu** or **ba**
in front of it. This is because most people always need to specify past or
future in their native language. When you think about it Lojbanically, most of
the time the time-direction is obvious, and the **pu** or **ba** superfluous!

The order in which direction-sumtcita and distance-sumtcita are said makes a
difference. Remember that the meanings of several tense words placed together
are pictured by an imaginary journey reading from left to right. Thus **pu
zu** is _a long time ago_ while **zu pu** is _in the past of some point in
time which is a long time toward the future or the past of now_. In the first
example, **pu** shows that we begin in the past, **zu** then that it is a long
time backwards. In the second example, **zu** shows that we begin at some
point far away in time from now, **pu** then, that we move backwards from that
point. Thus **pu zu** is always in the past. **zu pu** could be in the future.
The fact that these time tenses combine in this way is one of the differences
between tense sumtcita and other sumtcita. The meanings of other sumtcita are
not altered by the presence of additional sumtcita in a bridi.

As briefly implied earlier, all these constructs basically treat bridi as if
they were point-like in time and space. In actuality, most events play out
over a span of time and space. In the following few paragraphs, we will learn
how to specify intervals of time and space.

    **ze'i** = _sumtcita: spanning over the short time of {sumti_}
    **ze'a** = _sumtcita: spanning over the unspecified (medium) time of {sumti_}
    **ze'u** = _sumtcita: spanning over the long time of {sumti_}
    **ve'i** = _sumtcita: spanning over the short space of {sumti_}
    **ve'a** = _sumtcita: spanning over the unspecified (medium) space of {sumti_}
    **ve'u** = _sumtcita: spanning over the long space of {sumti_}

Six words at a time, I know, but remembering the vowel sequence and the
similarity of the initial letter z for temporal tenses and v for spacial
tenses might help the memorizing.

    **.oi** = _attitudinal: pain - pleasure_

Translate: **.oi dai do ve'u {ku} klama lo dotco gugde {ku} ze'u {ku} {vau}**

Answer: _Ouch, you spend a long time traveling a long space to Germany_

  
**ze'u** and its brothers also combine with other tenses to form compound
tenses. The rule for **ze'u** and the others are that any tenses preceding it
marks an endpoint of the process (relative to the point of reference) and any
tenses coming after it marks the other endpoint relative to the first. This
should be demonstrated with a couple of examples:

**.o'ocu'i do citka pu {ku} ze'u {ku} ba {ku} zu {ku} {vau}** \- _{tolerance}
you eat beginning in the past and for a long time ending at some point far
into the future of when you started_ or _Hmpf, you ate for a long time_. One
can also contrast **do ca {ku} ze'i {ku} pu {ku} klama {vau}** with **do pu
{ku} ze'i {ku} ca {ku} klama {vau}**. The first event of traveling has one
endpoint in the present and extends a little towards the past, while the
second event has one endpoint in the past and extends only to the present
(that is, slighty into the past or future) of that endpoint.

    **jmive** = _x 1 is alive by standard x2_

What does **ui mi pu {ku} zi {ku} ze'u {ku} jmive {vau}** express?

Answer: _{happiness!} I live from a little into the past and a long way
towards the future or past (obviously the future, in this case) of that event_
or _I am young, and have most of my life ahead of me :)_

Just to underline the similarity with spacial tenses, let's have another
example, this time with spacial tenses:

    **.u'e** = _attitudinal: wonder - commonplace_

**.u'e za'a bu'u {ku} ve'u {ku} ca'u {ku} zdani {vau}** \- What does it mean?

Answer:  _{wonder} {I observe!} Extending a long space from here to my front
is a home._ or _Wow, this home extending ahead is huge!_

Before we continue with this syntax-heavy tense system, i recommend spending
at least ten minutes doing something which doesn't occupy your brain in order
to let the information sink in. Sing a song or eat a cookie very slowly -
whatever, as long as you let your mind rest.

## Lesson 11: **ZAhO**

Though we won't go through all Lojban tense constructs for now, there is one
other kind of tense that I think should be taught now. These are called _event
contours_ , and represent a very different way of viewing tenses that we have
seen so far. So let's get to it:

Using the tenses we have learned so far, we can imagine an indefinite time
line, and we then place events on that line relative to the _now_. With event
contours, however, we view each event as a process, which has certain stages:
A time before it unfolds, a time when it begins, a time when it is in process,
a time when it ends, and a time after it has ended. Event contours then tells
us which part of the event's process was happening during the time specified
by the other tenses. We need a couple of tenses first:

    **pu'o** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi has not yet happened during {sumti_}
    **ca'o** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is in process during {sumti_}
    **ba'o** = _sumtcita: event contour: The process of bridi has ended during {sumti_}

This needs to be demonstrated by some examples. What's **ui mi pu'o {ku} se
zdani {vau}** mean?

Answer: _Yay, I'm about to have a home_.

But hey, you ask, why not just say **ui mi ba {ku} se zdani {vau}** and even
save a syllable? Because, remember, saying that you will have a home in the
future says nothing about whether you have a home now. Using **pu'o** ,
though, you say that you are now in the past of the process of you having a
home, which means that you don't have one now.

Note, by the way, that **mi ba {ku} se zdani {vau}** is similar to **mi pu'o
{ku} se zdani {vau}** , and likewise with **ba'o** and **pu**. Why do they
seem reversed? Because event contours view the present as seen from the
viewpoint of the process, whereas the other tenses view events seen from the
present.

Often, event contours are more precise that other kind of tenses. Even more
clarity is achieved by combining several tenses: **.a'o mi ba {ku} zi {ku}
ba'o {ku} gunka {vau}** \- _I hope I've soon finished working._

In Lojban, we also operate with an event's _natural beginning_ and its
_natural end_. The term _natural_ is highly subjective in this sense, and the
natural end refers to the point in the process where it should end. You can
say about a late train, for instance, that its process of reaching you is now
extending beyond its natural end. An undercooked, but served meal, similarly,
is being eaten before that process' natural beginning. The event contours used
in these examples are as follows:

    **za'o** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is in process beyond its natural end during {sumti_}
    **xa'o** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is immaturely in process during {sumti_}
    **cidja** = _x 1 is food, which is edible for x2_

Translate: **.oi do citka za'o lo nu do ba'o {ku} u'e citka zo'e noi cidja do
{vau} {ku'o} {vau} {kei} {ku}**

Answer: _Oy, you keep eating when you have finished, incredibly, eating
something edible!_

Image above: ZAhO tenses (event contours). All tenses above the line of the
event signify stages covering an amount of time. All tenses below the event
line signify stages which are point-like.

All of these tenses have been describing stages of a process which takes some
time (as shown on the graph above; those tenses above the event like). But
many of the event contours describes point like stages in the process, like
its beginning. As is true of **ca** and **bu'u** , they actually extend
slightly into the past and future of that point, and need not to be precise.

The two most important point-like event contours are:

    **co'a** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is at its beginning during {sumti_}
    **co'u** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is at its ending during {sumti_}

Furthermore, there is a point where the process is naturally complete, but not
necessarily has ended yet:

    **mo'u** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is at its natural ending during {sumti_}

Most of the time, though, processes actually end at their natural ending; this
is what makes it natural. Trains are not usually late, and people usually
retrain themselves to eat only edible food.

Since a process can be interrupted and resumed, these points have earned their
own event contour also:

    **de'a** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is pausing during {sumti_}
    **di'a** = _sumtcita: event contour: Bridi is resuming during {sumti_}

In fact, since **jundi** means _x1 pays attention to x2_ , **de'a jundi** and
**di'a jundi** are common Lojban ways of saying _BRB_ and _back_. One could of
course also say the event contours by themselves and hope the point gets
across.

Finally, one can treat an entire event, from the beginning to the end as one
single point using **co'i** :

    **penmi** = _x 1 meets x2 at location x3_

**mi pu {ku} zi {ku} co'i {ku} penmi lo dotco prenu {ku} {vau}** \- _A little
while ago, I was at the point in time where i met a German person_

## Lesson 12: Orders and questions

Phew, those two long lessons with syntax heavy Lojban gives the brain
something to ponder about. Especially because it's so different from English.
So let's turn to something a little lighter: Orders and questions.

What the... _sit up and focus!_

Since the way to express orders in English is to leave out the subject of the
clause, why did you assume that it was you I was speaking to, and not ordering
myself, or expressing the obligation someone else has? Because the English
language understands that orders, by their very nature, are always directed
towards the listener - the _you_ , and so the subject is not necessary.

In Lojban, eliding the subject yields **zo'e** , so that possibility is sadly
not open to us. Instead, we use the word **ko** , which is the imperative form
of **do**. Grammatically and bridi-wise, it's equivalent to **do** , but it
adds a layer of semantics, since it turns every statement with **ko** in it
into an order. _Do such that this sentence is true for you=**ko**!_ For the
same reason we don't need the subject in English sentences, we don't need
order-words derived from any other sumti than **do**.

How could you order one to go far away for a long time (using **klama** as the
only selbri?)

Answer: ko ve'u ze'u klama

(**.i za'a dai a'o mi ca co'u ciska lo famyma'o .i ko jimpe vau .ui**) - work
it out. Note that

    **ciska** = _x 1 writes text x2 on x3_

Questions in Lojban are very easy to learn, and they come in two kinds: Fill
in the blank, and true/false questions. Let's begin with the true-false
question kind - that's pretty overcomeable, since it only involves one word,
**xu**.

**xu** works like an attitudinal in the sense that it can go anywhere, and it
applies to the preceding word (or construct). It then transforms the sentence
into a question, asking whether it is true or not. In order to affirm, you
simply repeat the bridi:

**xu ze'u zdani do** **.i ze'u zdani mi** , or you just repeat the the selbri,
which is the bridi with all the sumti and tenses elided: **zdani**.

There is an even easier way to affirm using brika'i, but those are a tale for
another time. To answer _no_ or _false_ , you simply answer with the bridi
negated. That too, will be left for later, but we will return to question
answering by then.

The other kind of question is fill in the blank. Here, you ask for the
question word to be replaced for a construct, which makes the bridi correct.
There are several of these words, depending on what you are asking about:

    **ma** = _sumti question_
    **mo** = _selbri question_
    **xo** = _number question_
    **cu'e** = _tense question_

As well as many others. To ask about a sumti, you then just place the question
word where you want your answer: **do dunda ma mi** \- asks for the x2 to be
filled with a correct sumti. _You give what to me?_. The combination of
**sumtcita** \+ **ma** is very useful indeed:

    **mu'i** = _sumtcita: motivated by the abstraction of {sumti_}

**.oi do darxi mi mu'i ma** \- _Oy, why do you hit me?!_

Let's try another one. This time, you translate:

**ui dai do ca ze'u pu mo**

Answer: _You're happy, what have you been doing all this long time until now?_
Technically, it could also mean _what have you been?_ , but answering with
**ua nai li'a remna** (Uh, human, obviously) is just being incredibly annoying
on purpose.

Since tone of voice or sentence structure does not reveal whether a sentence
is a question or not, one better not miss the question word. Therefore, since
people tend to focus more on words in the beginning or at the end of
sentences, it's usually worth the while to re-order the sentence so that the
question words are at those places. If that is not feasable, **pau** is an
attitudinal marking that the sentence is a question. Contrary, **pau nai**
explicitly marks any question as being rhetorical.

While we are on the topic of questions, it's also appropriate to mention the
word **kau** , which is a marker for _indirect question_. What's an indirect
question, then? Well, take a look at the sentence: **mi djuno lo du'u ma kau
zdani do** \- _I know what is your home._

    **djuno** = _x 1 knows fact(s) x2 are true about x3 by epistemology x4_

One can think it as the answer to the question **ma zdani do**. More rarely,
one can mark a non-question word with **kau** , in which case one still can
imagine it as the answer to a question: **mi jimpe lo du'u dunda ti kau do**
\- _I know what you have been given, it is this._

## Lesson 13: Morphology and word classes

Back to more heavy (and interesting) stuff.

If you haven't already, I strongly suggest you find the Lojbanic recording
called "Story Time with Uncle Robin", or listen to someone speak Lojban on
Mumble, and then practice your pronunciation. Having an internal conversation
in your head in Lojban is only good if it isn't with all the wrong sounds, and
learning pronunciation from written text is hard. Therefore, this lesson will
not be on the Lojban sounds, however important they might be, but a short
introduction to the Lojban morphology.

What is morphology? The word is derived from Greek meaning _the study of
shapes_ , and in this context, we talk about how we make words from letters
and sounds, as contrasted with syntax - how we make sentences with words.
Lojban operates with different morphological word classes, which are all
defined by their morphology. To make it all nice and systematic though, words
with certain functions tend to be grouped by morphological classes, but
exceptions may occur.

Class  | Meaning  | Defined By  | Typical Function   
---|---|---|---  
Words:  |  |  |   
brivla  | bridi-word  | Among first 5 letters (excluding _â_) is a consonant cluster. Ends in vowel.  | Acts as a selbri by default. Always has a place structure.   
gismu  | Root-word  | 5 letters of the form CVCCV or CCVCV  | One to five sumti places. Covers basic concepts.   
Lujvo  | Compound word. Derived from from _lujvla_ , meaning _complex word_ | Min. 6 letters. Made by stringing rafsi together with binding letters if necessary.  | Covers more complex concepts than gismu.   
zi'evla  | Free-word  | As brivla, but do not meet defining criteria of gismu or lujvo, ex: **angeli** | Covers unique concepts like names of places or organisms.   
cmevla  | Name-word  | Beginning and ending with pause (full stop). Last sound/letter is a consonant.  | Always acts as a name or as the content of a quote.   
cmavo  | Grammar-word. From _cmavla_ , meaning _small word_ | One consonant or zero, always at the beginning. Ends in a vowel.  | Grammatical functions. Varies   
Word-fragments:  |  |  |   
rafsi  | Affix  | CCV, CVC, CV'V, -CVCCV, -CCVCV, CVCCy- or CCVCy-  | Not actual words, but can be stringed together to form lujvo   
  
  * **_cmevla_** are very easy to identify because they begin and end with a pause, signaled by a full stop in writing, and the last letter is a consonant. Cmevla have two functions: They can either act as a proper name, if prefixed by the article **la** (explained in next lesson), or they can act as the content of a quote. As previously stated, one can mark stress in the names by capitalizing the letters which are stressed. Examples of cmevla are: **.io'AN.** (Johan), **.mat.** (Matt) and **.cumindzyn.** (Xuming Zeng). Names which do not end in consonants have to have one added: **.anas.** (Anna), or removed: **.an.**
  * **_brivla_** are called _bridi-words_ because they by default are selbri, and therefore almost all Lojban words with a place structure are brivla. This has also given them the English nickname _content-words_. It's nearly impossible to say anything useful without brivla, and almost all words for concepts outside lojban grammar (and even most of the words for things in the language) are captured by brivla. As shown in the table, brivla has three subcategories:
  * **_gismu_** are the root words of the language. Only about 1450 exist, and very few new ones are added. They cover the most basic concepts like _circle_ , _friend_ , _tree_ and _dream_. Examples include **zdani** , **pelxu** and **dunda**
  * **_lujvo_** are made by combining rafsi (see under rafsi), respresenting gismu. By combining rafsi, one narrows down the meaning of the word. lujvo are made by an elaborate algorithm, so making valid lujvo on the fly is near impossible, with few exceptions like **selpa'i** , from **se prami** , which can only have one definition. Instead, lujvo are made once, its place structure defined, and then that definition is made official by the dictionary. Examples include brivla (bridi-word), **cinjikca** (sexual-socializing = flirting) and **cakcinki** (shell-insect = beetle).
  * **_zi'evla_** are made by making up words which fit the definition for brivla, but not for lujvo or gismu. They tend to cover concepts which it's hard to cover by lujvo, for instance names of species, nations or very cultural specific concepts. Examples include **xanguke** (South Korea) **cidjrpitsa** (pizza) or **.angeli** (angel).
  * **_cmavo_** are small words with one or zero consonants. They tend to not signify anything in the exterior world, but to have only grammatical function. Exceptions occur, and it's debatable how much attitudinals exists for their grammatical function. Another weird example are the words of the class GOhA, which act as brivla. It is valid to type several cmavo in a row as one word, but in these lessons, that won't be done. By grouping certain cmavo in functional units, though, it is sometimes easier to read. Thus, **uipuzuvukumi citka** is valid, and is parsed and understood as **ui pu zu vu ku mi citka**. Like other Lojban words, one should (but need not always) place a full stop before any words beginning with a vowel. 
    * cmavo of the form xVV, CV'VV or V'VV are experimental, and are words which are not in the official language definition, but which have been added by Lojban users to respond to a certain need.
  * **_rafsi_** are not Lojban words, and can never appear alone. However, several (more than one) rafsi combine to form lujvo. These must still live up to the brivla-definition, for instance **lojban** is invalid because it ends in a consonant (which makes it a cmevla), and **ci'ekei** is invalid because it does not contain a consonant cluster, and is thus read as two cmavo written as one word. Often, a 3-4 letter string is both a cmavo and a rafsi, like **zu'e** , which is both the BAI and the rafsi for **zukte**. Note that there is nowhere that both a cmavo and a rafsi would be grammatical, so these are not considered homophones. All gismu can double as (word-final) rafsi, if they are prefixed with another rafsi. The first four letter of a gismu suffixed with an "y" can also act as a rafsi, if they are suffixed with another rafsi. The vowel "y" can only appear in lujvo or cmevla. Valid rafsi letter combinations are: CVV, CV'V, CCV, CVCCy- CCVCy-, -CVCCV and -CCVCV.

Using what you know now, you should be able to answer the test I thus present:

Categorize each of the following words as cmevla (C), gismu (g), lujvo (l),
**zi'evla** (z) or cmavo (c):

A ) jai  | G ) mumbl   
---|---  
B ) .irci  | H ) .i'i   
C ) bostu  | I ) cu   
D ) xelman  | J ) plajva   
E ) po'e  | K ) danseke   
F ) djisku  | L ) .ertsa   
  
Answer: a-c, b-z, c-g, d-C, e-c, f-l, g-C, h-c, i-c, j-l, k-z, l-z. I left out
the full stops before and after names in order not to make the task too easy.
Note: some of these words, like **bostu** do not exist in the dictionary, but
this is irrelevant. The morphology still makes it a gismu, so it's just an
undefined gismu. Similarly with **.ertsa**

## Lesson 14: Lojban sumti 1Ë LE and LA

If you have read and understood the content of all the lessons until now, you
have amassed a large enough knowledge of Lojban so that it doesn't matter in
which order you learn the rest. As a result, the order of the next lessons
will be a mixture of sorted by increasing difficulty and sorted by importance
in ordinary Lojban conversation.

One of the biggest constrains on your speak now is your limited knowledge on
how to make sumti. So far, you only know **ti** and **lo SELBRI** , which
doesn't take you far considering how important sumti are in Lojban. This
lesson as well as the following two will be about the Lojban sumti. For now,
we focus on the descriptive-like sumti, the ones made with articles like
**lo**

Articles are in lojban called **gadri** , and all the ones discussed in this
lesson are terminated by **ku** , except the combination **LA CMEVLA**. We
will begin by describing three simple kinds of descriptive sumti, and then
immediately find that they are not so simple after all:

    **lo** = _gadri: generic, converts selbri to sumti._
    **le** = _gadri: specific and descriptive, converts selbri to sumti._
    **la** = _gadri: naming article, convert selbri or cmevla to sumti._

You are already familiar with **lo** and what it does. **lo** creates a sumti
referring to what fits in the first place of the following selbri.

This may be contrasted with **le** , which is specific and descriptive. Saying
**le gerku** says that you have one or more specific objects in mind, and you
use the selbri **gerku** to describe it, so that the listener may identify
those specific objects. This means that **le** has two important differences
from **lo** : Firstly, it cannot refer to objects in general, but always
refers to specific objects. Secondly, **le gerku** explicitly hints that the
selbri is only meant to help the speaker identify what the description refers
to, whether or not it actually satisfies the selbri. Perhaps the speaker is
referring to a hyena, but is not familiar with them and thinks _dog_ is a good
enough approximation to be understood; however, this non-veridicality is
perhaps over-emphasized in many texts. The best way to describe a dog is
usually to describe it as being a dog, and unless there is a good reason not
to, **le gerku** is usually presumed to refer to something which is also **lo
gerku**.

In translation, **lo gerku** can be any of _the dog_ , _the dogs_ , _a dog_ ,
_some dogs_ , or _dogs in general_ , while **le gerku** is _the dog_ or _the
dogs_. Even better for **le gerku** would be _the_ dog(s)__

Last of the three basic **gadri** , there is **la** , the naming **gadri** ,
which strips the following selbri of its usual meaning and refers to someone
or something whose name is that selbri. If I in English refer to a person
called Innocent by her name, I neither describe her as being innocent, nor do
I state that she is. I only state that by convention, that object is referred
to by that selbri or cmevla. Note that **la** and the gadri derived from it
can convert cmevla to sumti unlike any other **gadri**. Also: Be cautious:
Other texts do not mention that names can be formed from ordinary selbri using
the gadri **la**. But those heretics must burn; selbri names are as good as
they get, and many a proud Lojbanist have them.

**la** is a bit eccentric, since it _always_ marks the beginning of a name.
Unlike the other gadri, anything that can be grammatically placed after **la**
and its sisters are considered part of the name. For example, **le mi gerku**
is "my dog", but **la mi gerku** is someone or something called "My Dog".

These three basic **gadri** can be expanded with three more, which correspond
to the previous:

    **loi** = _gadri: generic, mass of individuals_
    **lei** = _gadri: specific and descriptive, mass of individuals_
    **lai** = _gadri: mass of named individuals_

These are the same as the first three articles in all aspects except for one:
they wrap the sumti into masses. Masses are used to abstract multiple
individuals into single entities for ease of expression. For example, a
football team can be described as a mass of its members, or an animal as a
mass of cells.

    **mivysle** = _x 1 is a biological cell of organism x2_
    **remna** = _x 1 is a human_

**loi mivysle cu remna** \- "Masses of cells are humans". Again, none of the
cells are humans. Indeed, the cells have very few human traits, but the cells
considered as a whole makes up a human. This example also shows that the
selbri following **loi** must be satisfied by the members of the mass, but not
by the mass itself: a human isn't a cell either.

A mass made with **lei** , such as **lei gerku** , refers to a mass formed by
a group of specific individuals, which the speaker refers to as **le gerku**.

  
It needs to be noted that regular sumti built using **lo** are usually
sufficient even when a selbri is meant to apply collectively. Constructing
masses is mainly necessary when talking about multiple groups of individuals.

    **sruri** = _x 1 flanks/encircles/encloses x2 in line/plane/directions x3_

**lo prenu cu sruri lo zdani** â **People surround the house.** The Lojban
sentence shares the obvious meaning of the English one, namely that people are
arranged around the house, not necessarily that individual people are
stretched around it.

But what if we want to explicitly say that people surround the house from head
to toe? In order to be explicit about a selbri distributing across
individuals, one needs **lo** , **le** or **la** with an outer quantifier. The
subject of quantifiers will be considered later, in lesson twenty-two.

  
Lastly, there are the (only two) generalizing gadri:

    **lo'e** = _gadri: veridical_ convert selbri to sumti _. Sumti refers to the archetype of**lo {selbri}**._
    **le'e** = _gadri: Descriptive_ convert selbri to sumti _. Sumti refers to the described/perceived archetype of**le {selbri}**._

Of which there is no **la** -equivalent.

So, what is actually meant by the archetype? For **lo'e tirxu** , it is an
ideal, imagined big cat, which has all the properties which best exemplifies
big cats. It would be wrong to say that this includes having a striped fur,
since a big systematic subgroup of the members of the set of big cats do not
have striped fur, such as the leopards and the jaguars. Likewise, the typical
human does not live in Asia even though a lot of humans do. However, if
sufficiently many humans have a trait, for instance being able to speak, we
can say:

    **kakne** = _x 1 is capable of doing/being x2 under circumstance x3_

**lo'e remna cu kakne lo nu tavla** \- _The typical human being can speak_.

**le'e** then, is the ideal object as perceived or described by the speaker.
This need not be factually correct, and is often translated as the
_stereotype_ , even though the English phrase have some unpleasant negative
connotations, which the Lojban does not. In fact, everyone has a stereotypical
archetypichal image of any category. In other words, **lo'e remna** is the
archetype which best exemplifies all **lo remna** , while the archetype **le'e
remna** best exemplifies all **le remna**.

The eleven gadri can be seen in the diagram below.

| Generic  | Masses  | Generalizing   
---|---|---|---  
Veridical  | lo  | loi  | lo'e   
Descriptive  | le  | lei  | le'e   
Name  | la  | lai  | does not exist   
  
Note: Earlier, there was a word **xo'e** for the generic gadri. However, the
rules and definitions for gadri were changed in late 2004, and the current set
of rules on this topic, nicked _xorlo_ has replaced the old way. Now, **lo**
is generic, and **xo'e** is used as an elliptical digit (lesson nineteen).
There are also gadri for building sets (**lo'i** , **le'i** , **la'i**), but
they are exceedingly rare in post-xorlo usage.

## Lesson 15: Lojban sumti 2Ë KOhA3, KOhA5 and KOhA6

See what happens if I try to translate the sentence: _Stereotypical people who
can speak Lojban speak to each other about the languages they can speak_ :

    **bangu** = _x 1 is a language used by x2 to express x3 (abstraction)_

**le'e prenu poi ke'a kakne lo nu tavla fo la .lojban. cu tavla le'e prenu poi
ke'a kakne lo nu tavla fo la .lojban. lo bangu poi lo prenu poi ke'a tavla fo
la .lojban. cu se bangu ke'a**

What we see is that the Lojban version is much longer than the English. This
is primarily because the first, ridiculously long sumti is being repeated two
more times in the Lojban text, while the English can refer to it by _each
other_ and _they_ \- much more efficiently. Wouldn't it be clever if Lojban
somehow had mechanisms for doing the same?

It turns out it does, what a surprise! Lojban has a range of words called
**sumka'i** meaning _sumti-representatives_. In English, we refer to them as
pro-sumti, because they are essentially the same as the English pronouns, but
with sumti instead of nouns. In fact, you already know **ti** , **do** and
**mi** , but there are many more, so let's get learning. First, we want to put
it into system. We can begin with the ones most familiar to English, and what
you've already learned:

    **ti** = _sumka'i:_ immediate âit': represents a sumti physically near the speaker'****
    **ta** = _sumka'i:_ nearby âit': represents a sumti some physical distance from the speaker OR close to the listener'****
    **tu** = _sumka'i:_ distant âit': represents a sumti physically far from the speaker and the listener.'****

You can again recognize the _i, a, u_ -sequence which pops up over and over.
Some things might take some clearing up, though. Firstly, these sumti can
represent anything which can be said to occupy a physical space. Objects,
certainly. Ideas, certainly not. Events are accepted, but only to the extent
they are restricted to a specific place - the Jasmin Revolution cannot be
pointed at, but some bar-fight or a kiss might. Secondly, note that the
distance is relative to different things for the different words: **tu** only
applies if it's distant from both the speaker and the listener. In cases where
the speaker and listener is far apart and the listener cannot see the speaker
talking, **ta** refers to something close to the listener. Thirdly, it's all
relative and context dependent. These three words are all problematic in
written text, for instance, because the position of the speaker and listener
is unknown to each other, and changes as time goes by. Furthermore, the author
of a book cannot point to an object and express the pointing in the book.

Then there is a series called KOhA3, to which **mi** and **do** (and **ko** ,
but I won't write that here) belongs:

    **mi** = _sumka'i: The speaker(s)._
    **mi'o** = _sumka'i: The mass of the speaker(s) and the listener(s) ._
    **mi'a** = _sumka'i: The mass of the speaker(s) and others._
    **ma'a** = _sumka'i: The mass of the speaker(s), the listener(s) and others._
    **do** = _sumka'i: The listener(s)._
    **do'o** = _sumka'i: The mass of the listener(s) and others._

These six sumka'i are more easily grasped in the below Venn diagram:

Venn diagram of KOhA3 (**ko** excluded). **le drata** is not a KOhA3, but
means _the other(s)_

It is possible for several people to be _the speakers_ , if one statement is
made on the behalf of all of them. Therefore, while _we_ can be translated as
either **mi** , **mi'o** , **mi'a** or **ma'a** , what one quite often means
is really just **mi**. All of these six, if they refer to more than one
individual, represent masses. Within bridi-logic, the bridi **mi gleki** said
by speaker A is exactly equivalent to **do gleki** said by speaker B to
speaker A, and are considered the same bridi. We will come back to this later,
in the **brika'i** (pro-bridi) lesson.

All of these **sumka'i** are very content-specific, and cannot be used, for
instance, to help us with the sentence which this lesson began with. The
following series can in principle be used to refer to any sumti:

    **ri** = _sumka'i:_ Last sumti mentioned'****
    **ra** = _sumka'i:_ A recent, but not the last sumti mentioned'****
    **ru** = _sumka'i:_ A sumti mentioned long ago'****

These sumti will refer to any terminated sumti except most other **sumka'i**.
The reason that most other **sumka'i** cannot be referred to by these sumti,
is that they are so easy to just repeat by themselves. The exception to the
rule are **ti** , **ta** and **tu** , because you could have changed what you
point at, and thus cannot just repeat the word. (There are some other
exceptions, to be handled later.) They will only refer to terminated sumti,
and thus cannot, for instance, be used to refer to an abstraction if the word
in is that abstraction: **le pendo noi ke'a pendo mi cu djica lo nu ri se
zdani** \- here **ri** cannot refer to the abstration, since it is not
terminated, nor to **mi** or **ke'a** , since they are sumka'i, so it refers
to **le pendo**.

**ra** and **ru** are context-dependent in what they refer to, but they follow
the rules mentioned above, and **ru** always refer to a more distant sumti
than **ra** , which is always more distant than **ri**.

**ri** and it's brothers are pretty well suited for dealing with the original
sentence. Try saying it using two instances of **sumka'i**!

Answer: **le'e prenu poi ke'a kakne lo nu tavla fo la .lojban. cu tavla ru lo
bangu poi ru cu se bangu ke'a**. **ri** is not correct, because it refers to
**la .lojban.**. **ra** could be used, but could be mistakenly be thought to
refer to **lo nu tavla fo la .lojban.** , but **ru** is assumed to refer to
the most distant sumti - the most outer one.

Lastly, there a sumtcita which represent utterances: So called utterance
variables. They need not be restricted to one sentence (jufra), but can be
several sentences, if the context allows it:

    **da'u** = _Utterance variable: Remote past sentence_
    **de'u** = _Utterance variable: Recent sentence_
    **di'u** = _Utterance variable: Previous sentence_
    **dei** = _Utterance variable: This sentence_
    **di'e** = _Utterance variable: Next sentence_
    **de'e** = _Utterance variable: Near future sentence_
    **da'e** = _Utterance variable: Remote future sentence_
    **do'i** = _Utterance variable: Elliptical utterance variable: Some sentence_

These represents sentences as sumti, and refer only to the spoken words or the
letters, not to the meaning behind them.

There are more Lojban **sumka'i** , but for now you probably need a break from
them. The next lesson will be on derived sumti, sumti made from other sumti.

## Lesson 16: Lojban sumti 3Ë derived sumti

You can probably see that the sumti **le bangu poi mi se bangu ke'a** is a
less than elegant expression for _my language_. This is because it's really a
work around. A language which I speak can be said to fill into the x1 of the
bridi **bangu mi**. We can't convert that to a sumti using a gadri: **le bangu
{ku} mi** is two sumti, because **bangu mi** is a bridi, not a selbri. Neither
can we convert it using **le su'u** , because the su'u gives the bridi a new
x1, the abstraction, and the **le** then extracts that. That makes an
abstraction sumti meaning something like _that something is my language_.

Enter **be**. **be** is a word which binds constructs (sumti, sumtcita and
others) to a selbri. Using it in ordinary selbri has no effect: in **mi nelci
be do** , the **be** does nothing. However, when a sumti is bound to a selbri
this way, you can use a gadri on the selbri without the sumti splitting off:
**le bangu be mi** is a correct solution to the problem above. Likewise, you
can attach a sumtcita: **le jinga be gau do** : _The one who wins because of
you_.

What if I want to attach several sumti to a selbri inside a gadri? _The giver
of the apple to you_ is **le dunda be lo plise be do** , right? Nope. The
second **be** attaches to the apple, meaning **le plise be do** \- _The apple
of the strain of you_ , which makes no sense. In order to string several sumti
to a selbri, the all the ones following the first must be bound with **bei**.
The _binding_ can be terminated with **be'o** \- one instance of **be'o** for
each selbri which has sumti bound by **be**.

To list them:

    **be** = _binds sumti or sumtcita to selbri_
    **bei** = _binds a second, third, fourth (ect) sumti or sumtcita to a selbri_
    **be'o** = _ends binding to selbri_

There is also ways to loosely associate a sumti with another. **pe** and
**ne** for restrictive and non-restrictive association. Actually, **le bangu
pe mi** is a better translation of _my language_ , since this phrase, like the
English, is vague as to how the two are associated with each other.

**pe** and **ne** are used as loose association only, like saying _my chair_
about a chair which you sit on. It's not really yours, but has something do to
with you. A more intimate connection can be established with **po** , which
makes the association unique and binding to a person, as in _my car_ for a car
that you actually own. The last kind of associator is **po'e** , which makes a
so-called "inalienable" bond between sumti, meaning that the bond is innate
between the two sumti. Some examples could be "my mother", "my arm" or "my
home country"; none of these "possesions" can be lost (even if you saw off
your arm, it's still _your_ arm), and are therefore inalienable. Almost all of
the times a **po'e** is appropriate, though, the x2 of the selbri contains the
one to which the x1 is connected, so **be** is better.

    **ne** = _non-restrictive relative phrase. "which is associated with..."_
    **pe** = _restrictive relative phrase. "which is associated with..."_
    **po** = _possesive relative phrase. "which is specific to..."_
    **po'e** = _inalienable relative phrase. "which belongs to..."_

A very useful construct to know is **{gadri} {sumti} {selbri}**. this is
equivalent to **{gadri} {selbri} pe {sumti}**. For instance **le mi gerku** is
equivalent to **le gerku pe mi**. One could have description sumti inside
description sumti, saying **le le se cinjikca be mi ku gerku** , = **le gerku
pe le se cinjikca be mi** =_the dog of the man I'm flirting with_ , but that's
not very easy to read (or to understand when spoken), and is often being
avoided.

One need also to learn **tu'a** , since it will make a lot of sentences much
easier. It takes a sumti and converts it to another sumti - an elliptical
abstraction which has something to do with the first sumti. For example, I
could say **mi djica lo nu mi citka lo plise** , or I could let it be up to
context what abstraction about the apple I desire and just say **mi djica tu'a
lo plise**. One always has to guess what abstraction the speaker means by
**tu'a SUMTI** , so it should only be used when context makes it easy to
guess. Another example:

    **gasnu** = _x 1 does/brings about x2 (volition not implied)_

**za'a do gasnu tu'a lo skami** \- _I see that you make the computer do
something_. Officially, **tu'a SUMTI** is equivalent to **le su'u SUMTI
co'e**. Vague, but useful. There are situations where you cannot use **tu'a**
, even though it would seem suitable. These situations are when I don't want
the resulting sumti to be an abstraction, but a concrete sumti. In this case,
one can use **zo'e pe**.

    **tu'a** = _convert sumti to vague abstraction involving the sumti. Equivalent to**le su'u SUMTI co'e kei ku**_

Finally, one kind of sumti can be turned into another by the words of the
class LAhE.

    **lu'a** = _Convert individual(s)/mass/sequence/set to individuals._
    **lu'i** = _Convert individual(s)/mass/sequence/set to a set._
    **lu'o** = _Convert individual(s)/mass/sequence/set to mass._
    **vu'i** = _Convert individual(s)/mass/sequence/set to sequence; the order is not stated._

The use of these words is straight-forwardly: Placing them before a sumti of a
certain type makes a new sumti of a new type. Notice, though, that as a fourth
kind of sumti, a sequence has been introduced. This is not used very often (it
doesn't have its own gadri, for instance), but just included here for
completion.

The last two members of LAhE do not convert between types of sumti, but allows
you to speak of a a sumti by only mentioning something which references to it:

If one sumti A refers to a sumti B, for instance because sumti A is a title of
a book, or a name, or a sentence (which always refer to something, at least a
bridi), **la'e SUMTI A** refers to sumti B. For instance, **mi nelci la'e
di'u** for _I like what you just said_ (not **mi nelci di'u** which just means
_I like your previous sentence_) or **la'e le cmalu noltru** for the book _The
Little Prince_ , and not some little prince himself. The cmavo **lu'e** does
the exact reverse â **lu'e SUMTI** refers to an object which refers to the
sumti.

    **la'e** = _"the thing referred to by" - extracts a sumti A from a sumti B which refers to A._
    **lu'e** = _"the thing referring to" - extracts a sumti B from a sumti A, when B refers to A._

## Lesson 17: Cute assorted words

And with that, third chapter, you know a lot about Lojban sumti. After such a
long time of rigorous systematic learning, what could be more fitting that
this lesson where I speak about some words which I could not, or wanted not to
fit into any other lessons? So here are a few small and really useful words:

The following cmavo are all elliptical words. You should already be familiar
with the first.

    **zo'e** = _elliptical sumti_
    **co'e** = _elliptical selbri_
    **do'e** = _elliptical sumtcita_
    **ju'a** = _elliptical evidential_
    **do'i** = _elliptical utterance variable_
    **ge'e** = _elliptical attitudinal_

All of these act grammatically as a cmavo of the kind they represent, but they
contain no information, and can be quite handy when you're lazy and don't need
to be specific anyway. There are, however, a few things which need to be
cleared up:

  * **zo'e** have to refer to something which is claimed to have a value. _zero cars_ or _nothing_ , for instance, has no value, and therefore cannot be referred to by **zo'e**. This is because, if it could mean _nothing_ by **zo'e** , then any selbri could be identical to its negation, if one of the elided sumti were filled with a **zo'e** with no value.
  * **ge'e** does not mean that you feel no emotion, just that you feel nothing special or worth to mention at the moment. It's similar to _I'm fine._. **ge'e pei** ask about an elliptical emotion and is a good translation for: _How are you feeling?_.
  * **co'e** is handy when needing a selbri in a construct for grammatical reasons, like in the definition of **tu'a** in the previous lesson.
  * **ju'a** does not change the truth value or subjective understanding of the bridi or anything like that. In fact, it's mostly does nothing. However, **ju'a pei** , _What is your basis for saying that?_ is handy.
  * **do'i** is really useful. A lot of times when you refer to utterances or conversations by words like _this_ or _that_ , you want **do'i**.
  * If you fill in more sumti than a selbri has places for, the last sumti have implied **do'e** sumtcita in front of them.

Furthermore, there is a word, **zi'o** , that you can fill a sumti place with
to delete it from any selbri. **lo melbi be zi'o** , for instance, is just
_Something beautiful_ , and does not include the usual x2 of **melbi** , which
is the observer who judges something to be beautiful. Thus, it can mean
something like _Objectively beautiful._ It does not state that nothing fills
the sumti place which is being deleted, just that the sumti place is not being
considered in the selbri. Using **zi'o** with a sumtcita gives weird results.
Formally, they should cancel each other out. Practically, it would probably be
understood as an explicit way of saying that the sumtcita does not apply, as
in: **mi darxi do mu'i zi'o** \- _I hit you, with or without motivation._

Then there is the word **jai**. It's one of those cool, small words which are
hard to grasp, but easy to work with once you know it. It has two distinct,
but similar functions. Both have something to do with converting the selbri,
like **se** does.

    **jai** = _Selbri conversion: Converts sumtcita or unspecified abstraction to x 1. Use with **fai**_

    **fai** = _Marks sumti place. Works like**fa**. To be used with **jai**._

The first grammatical construction it can make is "**jai** {sumtcita}
{selbri}". It changes the sumti places such that the sumti place of the
sumtcita becomes the selbri's x1, and the selbri's old x1 is removed, and only
accessible by using **fai** , which works like **fa**. You can see it with
this example:

    **gau** = _sumtcita (from**gasnu**) _bridi has been brought about by/with active agent {sumti}'****

**do jai gau jundi ti fai mi**. - _You bring about attention to this by me_.
The new selbri, **jai gau jundi** , has the place structure of _x1 brings
about attention paid to x2_. These are then filled by **do** and **ti**. The
**fai** then marks the place for the old x1, the one who was paying attention,
and it is filled with **mi**. This word can be very convenient and has tons of
uses. A good example is descriptive-like sumti. One can, for instance, refer
to _the method of volitional action_ by **lo jai ta'i zukte**.

    **ta'i** = _sumtcita (from**tadji**): Bridi is done with the method of {sumti_}

Can you deduce what the ordinary Lojban phrase **do jai gau mo** means?

Answer: _What are you doing?_

The other function of **jai** is easier to explain. It simply converts the
selbri such that the sumti in the x1 gets a **tu'a** in front of it (**ko'a
jai broda** = **tu'a ko'a broda**). In other words, it converts the selbri in
a way such that it builds an elliptical abstraction from the sumti in the x1,
and then fills x1 with the abstraction instead of the actual sumti. Again, the
original sumti place is accessible by **fai**.

A very active Lojban IRC-user often says **le gerku pe do jai se stidi mi** ,
to use a random example of a sumti in x1. What's he saying?

    **stidi** = _x 1 inspires/suggests x2 in/to x3_

Answer: _I suggest (something about) your dog._

So far you've learned how to convert bridi to selbri, selbri to sumti, and
selbri into bridi, since all selbri by themselves are also bridi. You only
need one last function: convert sumti to selbri. This is done with the word
**me**. It accepts a sumti and converts it into a selbri.

    **me** = _Generic convert sumti to selbri. x 1 is/are among the referents of SUMTI_

When screwing a sentence up, knowing how to correct yourself is a good idea.
There are three words in Lojban which you can use to delete your previous
word(s)

    **si** = _deletion: Deletes last word only._
    **sa** = _deletion: Deletes back until next cmavo spoken._
    **su** = _deletion: Deletes entire discourse._

The function of these words are obvious: They delete words as if they have
never been spoken. They do not work inside certain quotes (all quotes except
**lu...li'u**), though, as that would leave it impossible to quote these
words. Several **si** in a row deletes several words

## Lesson 18: Quotes

One of the key design features of Lojban is that it's supposed to be audio-
visual isomorphic, meaning that everything expressed in text should also be
expressed in speech and vice versa. Therefore, there cannot be any punctuation
which is not pronounced. This means that Lojban has a wide range of words to
quote other words. All Lojban quotes take some input of text and converts it
to a sumti. Let's begin with the most simple:

    **lu** = _Quote word: Begin quote of grammatical Lojban content_
    **li'u** = _Quote word: End quote of grammatical Lojban content_

The text inside this construct must by itself be grammatical. It can quote all
Lojban words with some few exceptions, most notably, obviously, **li'u**.

Try to translate the following sentence. Take your time.

**mi stidi lo drata be tu'a lu ko jai gau mo li'u**

    **drata** = _x 1 is different from x2 by standard_

Answer: _I suggest something different than something about**ko jai gau mo**._

These quote words cannot quote ungrammatical text. This is sometimes useful,
when you want to only pick out part of a sentence, as in: _is**gi'e** a Lojban
sumtcita?_

For this, you need these two cmavo

    **lo'u** = _Quote word: Begin quote of ungrammatical but Lojban content_
    **le'u** = _Quote word: End quote of ungrammatical but Lojban content_

The text inside must be Lojban words, but need not be grammatical. Try to
translate the above example (the one with **gi'e**) into Lojban

Answer: **xu lo'u gi'e le'u lojbo sumtcita**

This quote can be used to quote all Lojban words except **le'u**. However,
this is not enough. If we want to translate _is**do mo** a correct translation
of "What's up?"_, we might be slightly wrong about what we here state, since
**do mo** also can mean _What are you?_ , but let's roll with it for a second.
What we need here is the word **zoi**.

    **zoi** = _Next cmavo starts all-purpose quote and closes all-purpose quote._

When using **zoi** , you pick any morphologically correct lojban word at will
(called the delimiter), which then opens a quote. To close it, use that word
again. This way, you can quote anything except the delimiter, which shouldn't
be a problem because you can pick it yourself. Usually, the word picked is
either **zoi** itself, or a letter which stands for the language which the
quote is written in. Example: _I liked The Phantom of the Opera_ is **mi pu
nelci la'e zoi zoi. The Phantom of the Opera .zoi** Notice two things:
Firstly, I need a **la'e** , since I didn't like the quote, but rather what it
referred to. Secondly, between the chosen delimiter and the quote, there are
pauses, optionally represented by a full stop in writing. This pause is
necessary to correctly identify the delimiter.

Try to translate the above sentence concerning _What's up?_

    **drani** = _x 1 is correct/proper in aspect x2 in situation x3 by standard x4_

Answer: **xu lu do mo li'u drani xe fanva zoi gy. What's up? .gy**. Here the
delimiter **gy** is chosen because it's short for **glico** , meaning
"English"

Closely analogously, there is **la'o**. It works exactly like **zoi** , but
turns the resulting quote into a name. It is needed because normally, only
selbri and cmevla can be names, not quotes.

    **la'o** = _Next cmavo is begin all-purpose quote and close all-purpose quote â use as name._

Last of the official quote words, there is **zo**. **zo** always quotes the
next Lojban word, no matter what it is. It's pretty handy.

    **zo** = _quotes next Lojban word, no matter what._

Example:

**zo zo zo'o plixau**  
 _"zo" is useful, hehe._  
---  
  
    **zo'o** = _attitudinal: discursive: Humorously, "kidding you"_
    **plixau** = _x 1 is useful for x2 to do purpose x3_

Some Lojban users have found it useful to supplement with four additional
quote words. The most used is:

**u'i ri pu cusku zo'oi Doh**  
 _Ha ha, he said "Doh!"_  
---  
  
    **zo'oi** = _Quote next word only. Next word is identified by pauses in speech or whitespace/dot in writing:_

It is apparently very easy to use, but as a matter of fact, general use of
them is very problematic. Users should be aware that the word following
**zo'oi** should not include a period, a glottal stop or a pause. For example,
*** zo'oihttp://www.lojban.org/** is not grammatical since the string
"http://www.lojban.org/" contains periods.

Another erratic text: *** lo salpo (ku) fa'u lo finti cu smuni zo'oi saka fa'u
zo'oi sa.ka lo ponjo**. Here "sa.ka" has a period inside.

Analogous to **zo'oi** and **la'o** , there is also the word **la'oi** , which
works just like **zo'oi** , but forms a sumti that refers to something called
(whatever next words is put):

    **la'oi** = _Scope over the next word only; "something called by the name...". Next word is identified by pauses in speech or whitespace/dot in writing._

How would you say: _"Safi" is an English guy. It's his name_?

    **glico** = _x 1 is English/pertains to English culture in aspect x2_
    **cmene** = _x 1 is the name of x2 as used by x3_

Answer: **la'oi Safi glico .i lu'e ri cmene ri**

**la'oi** has the same problem as **zo'oi** : the word following **la'oi**
should not include a period, a glottal stop or a pause. For example, the
following sentences are not grammatical:

  * **.u'a mi te vecnu lo zgike datni pe la'oi t.A.T.u**. Here "t.A.T.u" has periods inside ("t.A.T.u" was a musical group).

Example of spoken text: **la'oi .uli.uli zgike tutci**. "`uli`uli" is a
Hawaiian musical instrument. This word has periods inside.

Example of spoken text: **ju'i la'oi
jugemujugemugokounosurikirekaijarisuigiono-
suigioumatsu,unraimatsufuuraimatsuku,unerutokoronisumutokoro,iaburakoujinoburakouji-
paipopaipopaiponosiu,uringansiu,uringan,nogu,urindaigu,urindainoponpokopi,inoponpokona,anotcoukiu,umeinotcousuke
mi'o ko'oi klama lo ckule**. Don't take a breathing in the name, or it will
result in an _error_! This word
("ãããããããããããã®ãããããããããããããã®ãããããã¾ã¤ããããã¾ã¤ãµãããã¾ã¤ããã­ãã¨ããã«ããã¨ãããã¶ããããã®ã¶ããããã±ãã½ã±ãã½ã±ãã½ã®ããã¼ããããããã¼ããããã®ãã¼ããã ããã¼ããã ãã®ã½ãã½ãã´ã¼ã®ã½ãã½ããªã¼ã®ã¡ãããããããã®ã¡ãããã")
is a famous Japanese name of a boy.)

Thirdly, **ra'oi** quotes the next rafsi. Since rafsi are not words, they
would usually have to be quoted by **zoi**. Furthermore, several rafsi are
also cmavo. To avoid confusion of which is meant, **ra'oi** always refer to a
rafsi, and is wrong in front of any text string which are not rafsi.

What does **ra'oi zu'e rafsi zo zukte .i ku'i zo'oi zu'e sumtcita** mean?

    **ku'i** = _attitudinal: discursive: However / though (contrasts to something previously said)_
    **rafsi** = _x 1 an affix for word/concept x2 with properties/of form x3 in language x4_

Answer: _The rafsi**zu'e** is a rafsi for **zukte**. But **zu'e** is a
sumtcita._

And finally the useful word **ma'oi**. **ma'oi** quotes any cmavo, but treats
the quote as a name for the word class (selma'o) to which that word belongs.
So, for instance, **ba'o** belongs to the wordclass called ZAhO, so **ma'oi
ba'o** is unofficial Lojban for the selmaho **ZahO**.

Try it out. Say that **pu** and **ba** are in the same selma'o!

    **cmavo** = _x 1 is a grammatical word of class x2 in language x3_

One possible answer: **zo pu cmavo ma'oi ba**

## Lesson 19: Numbers

When learning a language, one of the things which are usually taught very
early on is how to count. This really makes little sense, because it's not
necessary to know numbers if you don't know how to speak about those things to
which they apply. This is partly the reason why I have left it for lesson
number nineteen. The other reason is that while the numbers themselves are
easy to learn, how they apply to sumti can get very confusing indeed. That,
however, we will save for a later lesson.

Before learning the words themselves, you should know that numbers do not have
any internal grammar. This means that any row of number words (henceforth
referred to as a "number string") are treated identically to any other number
string to the Lojban grammar, even if the string makes no sense. Therefore,
one can never answer unambiguously whether a number construct makes sense or
not. There are, however, intended ways of using the number words, and
confusion will probably result if you deviate from the standard.

Learning all the number words of Lojban are way beyond the scope of this
lesson, so you will only be introduced to what is normally used in text. The
wide range of Lojban mathematical cmavo are called **mekso** (Lojban for
"mathematical expression"), and is widely disregarded because of its
complexity and questionable advantage over so-called bridi math.

Let's begin with the ordinary Lojban numbers, from zero to nine:

Notice how the vowels are alternating (with the exception of **no**), and how
no consonant is used for two digits. In order to express numbers higher than
nine, the numbers are just strung together:

  * **vo mu ci** â four hundred and fifty three (453)
  * **pa no no no no** ten thousand (10 000)

There is also a _question-digit_ , which is used like other fill-in-the-blank
question words. It's **xo**. The answer to such a question may be just the
relevant digit(s) by itself, or they can be numerical constructs, as shown
later.

  * **ci xo xo xo** â "Three thousand and how many?" (3???)

    **xo** = _question digit â use like any other digit to ask for the correct digit._
The experimental word **xo'e** is sometimes used to mean an unspecified,
elliptical digit. Its definition is not official, though.

  * **ci xo'e xo'e xo'e** â Three thousand and something

    **xo'e** = _elliptical digit._
Since all number strings are treated grammatically the same, one might also answer several digits to one **xo'e** Furthermore, there is also a set of hexadecimal digits A through F. By default, Lojban operates in base 10, but when using hexadecimal digits, it can be safely assumed that you use base sixteen:  dau  | fei  | gai  | jau  | rei  | xei  | vai   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
10(A)  | 11(B)  | 12(C)  | 13(D)  | 14(E)  | 14(E)  | 15(F)   
  
  
Yes, I know there are two words for E. The official one is **rei** (all three-
letter cmavo beginning with x is experimental). **xei** was invented to avoid
confusion with **re**.

The base can be explicitly stated using **ju'u** : Any number before **ju'u**
the number being spoken of, any number after is the base of the number:

  * **dau so fei no ju'u pa re** â A9B0 in base 12 (notice here that base 12 is always in decimal. It is possible to permanently change the base you speak in, but since it has never been used in practice, it has not been standardized how one should do it)

Fractions are also useful to learn how to express. They are usually expressed
via a decimal point, **pi**.

    **pi** = _Decimal point (or point in whichever base you are talking in)_

**pa re pi re mu** â twelve point two five (12.25).

Like in mathematics, when no number string is placed before or after **pi** ,
zero is assumed.

Related to this, the number separator **pi'e** is used to separate numbers,
either to separate digits when speaking in a base larger than sixteen, or when
a decimal point is not applicable, for instance, when talking about time in
hours, minutes, seconds:

**pa so pi'e re mu pi'e no ju'u re ze** â Nineteen, twenty-five, zero in base
27 (JP0 base 27)

**re re pi'e vo bi** â twenty-two, fourty eight (22:48)

There is also a range of number words which are not mathematically exact but
rather subjective or relative. The behaviors of these words are almost exactly
like the behavior of digits, except they cannot be combined to make bigger
numbers the way digits can:

ro  | so'a  | so'e  | so'i  | so'o  | so'u   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
all  | almost all  | most  | many  | some  | few   
  
  

When combined with any of the digits, these words are assumed to give a second
verdict about the size of the number:

**mu bi so'i sai** â Fifty eight, which is really many.

They should therefore not be placed in the middle of a number string. When
placed after **pi** , they are assumed to convey the size of a fraction:

  * **pi so'u** â a small part of it
  * **pi so'o** â some of it
  * **pi so'i** â a large part of it
  * **pi so'e** â most of it
  * **pi so'a** â almost all of it

These are some hightly subjective numbers - they work just like the previous
ones.

du'e  | mo'a  | rau   
---|---|---  
too many  | too few  | enough   
  
  

The following five are context-based numbers â these work like the previous
ones, with the exception that they take the next number in order to assign
them meaning:

da'a  | su'e  | su'o  | za'u  | me'i   
---|---|---|---|---  
all except n  | At most n  | At least n  | more than n  | less than n   
  
If no number string follow them, _one_ is assumed.

**so'i pa re da'a mu** â Many, which is twelve, which is all but five.

The two last number words you should know have slightly more complicated
grammar:

    **ji'i** = _number rounding or number approximation_

When **ji'i** is placed before a number, the entire number is approximated:

**ji'i ze no za'u rau ju'o** â "About seventy, which is more than enough,
certainly __

Placed in the middle of the number, only the following digits are non-exact.
At the end of a number, it signifies that the number has been rounded off.

    **ki'o** = _Number comma - separates digits within one string; Thousands._

It is not incidential that **ki'o** sounds like _kilo_. At its simplest,
**ki'o** is used to separate three digits at a time in large numbers, much
like commas are used in English:

**pa ki'o so so so ki'o bi xa ze** â 1,999,867

If less than three digits are put before a **ki'o** , the digits are assumed
to be the least significant ones, and zeros are assumed to fill in the rest:

**vo ki'o ci bi ki'o pa ki'o ki'o** â 4,038,001,000,000

**ki'o** is used similarly after a decimal point.

That concludes the common Lojban numbers themselves. How they apply to sumti
is a science in itself, and we leave that for lesson twenty-two. Now we focus
on how these numbers can be used in a bridi.

A string of number words by themselves are grammatical, since they can act as
an answer to a **xo** -type of question. In this case, however, they cannot be
considered part of any bridi. In general, if numbers fill part of a bridi,
they do so in one of two forms: Pure numbers and quantifiers. We will return
to quantifiers in a later lesson. For now, we will look at pure numbers.

A pure number is any row of number words prefixed with **li**. This makes a
sumti directly from the number, and refers to the mathematical concept of, for
instance, _the number six_. Its famyma'o is **lo'o**

    **li** = _convert number/mekso-expression to sumti._

    **lo'o** = _famyma'o: end convert number/mekso-expression to sumti._

These pure sumti are usually what fills the x2 of brivla such as **mitre** or
**cacra**

    **mitre** = _x 1 is x2 metres in dimension x3 by standard x4_

    **cacra** = _x 1 is x2 hours in duration (default 1) by standard x3_

Try to translate the following:

**le ta nu cinjikca cu cacra li ci ji'i u'i nai**

Answer: _(sigh) That flirting has been going on for around three hours._

How do you count to three in Lojban?

Answer: **li pa li re li ci**

The last thing we'll go through in this lesson is the words of the selma'o MAI
and those of MOI.

MAI only contains two words, **mai** and **mo'o**. Both of these convert any
number string to an ordinal, which has the grammar of attitudinals. Ordinals
are used to divide a text into numbered segments, like chapters or parts. The
only difference between **mai** and **mo'o** is that **mo'o** quantifies
larger subdivisions of text, allowing you to divide a text on two different
levels, for example enumerating chapters with **mo'o** and sections with
**mai**. Notice that these as well as the MOI take any number string directly,
without any need for **li**.

    **mai** = _Lower-order ordinal marker: Convert number to ordinal._
    **mo'o** = _Higher order ordinal marker: Convert number to ordinal._

There are five MOI, and they all convert any number string to selbri. We'll
take them one at a time:

    **moi** = _Convert number n to selbri: x 1 is the n'th member of set x2 by order x3_

Example:

**la lutcimin ci moi lo'i ninmu pendo be mi le su'u lo clani zmadu cu lidne lo
clani mleca**  
 _Lui-Chi Min is third among my female friends by the order: The more tall
ones precedes the less tall ones._  
---  
  
When specifying a sequence, it is widely understood that if a **ka**
-abstraction (lesson thirty) is used as a sumti, the members of the set are
ordered from the one with most of the property to the one with less of the
property, so the x3 of the following sentence could have been shortened to
**lo ka clani**.

    **lidne** = _x 1 is before x2 in sequence x3_
    **clani** = _x 1 is long in dimension x2 by standard x3_
    **zmadu** = _x 1 exceeds x2 in property/aspect x3 by amount x4_
    **mleca** = _x 1 is less than/is less characterized than x2 by property/aspect x3 by amount x4_
    **mei** = _Convert number n to selbri: x 1 is the mass formed from the set x2, which has the n members of x3_

Notice here that x3 are supposed to be individuals, x2 a set and x1 a mass.

What would **mi ci mei** mean?

Anwer: _We are group of three._

    **si'e** = _Convert number n to selbri: x 1 is n times x2_

Example: **le vi plise cu me'i pi pa si'e lei mi cidja be ze'a lo djedi** â
_This apple here is less than one tenth of my food for one day_

Please note that the definition of **si'e** when looked up will tell you that
it's "x1 is an nth of x2", instead of "x1 is n times x2". But people only use
it as I have defined it, so the definition in the dictionaries will probably
change.

    **cu'o** = _Convert number n to selbri: x 1 has n probability of occurring under conditions x2_

Example:

**lo nu mi mrobi'o cu pa cu'o lo nu mi denpa ri**  
 _An event of me dying has probability 1 under the conditions: I wait for it =
Me dying is completely certain if I wait long enough._  
---  
  
    **denpa** = _x 1 waits for x2, being in state x3 until resuming/doing x4_
    **va'e** = _Convert number n to selbri: x 1 is at the n'th position on the scale x2_

Example:

**li pa no cu ro va'e la torinon**  
 _10 is the highest value on the Torino-scale._  
---  
  
## Lesson 20: **bo** , **ke** , **co** , and more cuteness

Say you're an important American buyer of computers. How do you express this?
For constructs like these, tanru are ideal: **mi vajni merko skami te vecnu**.
No wait, that's not right. Tanru are grouped from left to right, so this tanru
is understood: ((**vajni merko**) **skami**) **te vecnu** , a buyer of
computers for important Americans. You can't change the order of the selbri to
get a useful tanru. Neither can this be solved with logical connectives, which
you will first learn about later anyway. The only way to make a fitting tanru
is to force the selbri to group differently.

To bind two selbri close together in a tanru, the word **bo** can be placed
between them: **mi vajni bo merko skami bo te vecnu** is read **mi** (**vajni
bo merko**) (**skami bo te vecnu**), which is useful in this context. If bo is
placed between several selbri in a row, they are grouped from right to left
instead of the usual left to right: **mi vajni merko bo skami bo te vecnu** is
read **vajni** (**merko bo** (**skami bo te vecnu**)) an _important (American
computer-buyer)_ , which is even more appropriate in the situation.

    **bo** = _Binds two selbri together strongly._

How would you say _That's a tasty yellow apple_?

    **kukte** = _x 1 is tasty for x2_

Answer: **ti kukte pelxu bo plise**

What about _That's a big, tasty yellow apple_?

Answer: **ti barda kukte bo pelxu bo plise**

Another approach to this is to use the words **keâ¦ke'e**. These can be
considered as equivalent to the parenthesises used in the paragraph above.
**ke** begins strong selbri grouping, **ke'e** ends it.

    **ke** = _begin strong selbri grouping._
    **ke'e** = _end strong selbri grouping._

The strength of the binding is the same as that of **bo**. Therefore, **mi
vajni merko bo skami bo te vecnu** can be written **mi vajni ke merko ke skami
te vecnu {ke'e} {ke'e}**.

How could you say _I'm a German seller of yellow homes?_

Answer: **mi dotco ke pelxu zdani vecnu**

While we're at messing with the ordinary tanru structure, there is another
word worth paying attention to. If I want to say that I'm a professional
translator, I could say **mi fanva se jibri**.

    **jibri** = _x 1 is a job of x2_
    **dotybau** = _x 1 is German used by x2 to say x3_
    **glibau** = _x 1 is English used by x2 to say x3_

If I wanted to say that I'm a professional translater from English to German,
I'd have to mess around with **be** and **bei** : **mi fanva be le dotybau bei
le glibau be'o se jibri** , and the fact that it was a tanru could quickly be
lost in speech due to the complicated structure of the sentence. Here, we can
use the word **co**. it inverts the tanru, making the rightmost selbri modify
the leftmost instead of the other way around:

**mi se jibri co fanva le dotybau le glibau** is the same bridi as the
previous Lojban one, but much more easy to understand. Notice that any sumti
before the tanru fills **se jibri** , while any following it only fills the
modifying selbri: **fanva**.

    **co** = _Invert tanru. Any previous sumti fill the modified, any following fill the modifier._

The strength by which two selbri are bound together with co is very weak â
even weaker than normal tanru grouping without any grouping words. This makes
sure that, in a co-construct, the leftmost selbri is always the selbri being
modified, and the rightmost always modifies, even if any of those parts are
tanru. This makes a co-construct easy to parse:

**ti pelxu plise co kukte** is read **ti** (**pelxu plise**) **co kukte** ,
which is the same as **ti kukte pelxu bo plise**. This also means that a
**keâ¦ke'e** cannot encompass a **co**.

The cmavo of the selma'o GIhA, the bridi-tail afterthought logical
connectives, however, binds even looser than **co**. This is in order to
totally avoid confusion about which selbri binds to which in a GIhA-construct.
The answer is simple: The GIhA never emcompasses any selbri-groups.

How can you express _I am an important American buyer of computers_ using a
**co**?

Answer: **mi skami te vecnu co vajni merko**

If it's of any use, this is the list of different kind of selbri groupers
ranked by strength:

  1. **bo** and **ke..ke'e**
  2. logical connectives other than bridi-tail afterthought logical connectives (explained in lesson twenty-five)
  3. no grouping words
  4. **co**
  5. bridi-tail afterthought logical connectives (also in lesson twenty-five)

The rest of this lesson will not be on selbri grouping, but much like lesson
seventeen mention assorted words, which can be of use.

**bo** has another use, which seems separate from selbri grouping: It can also
bind a sumtcita to an entire bridi, so that the content of the sumtcita is not
a sumti, but the following bridi. This is best explained with an example.

    **xebni** = _x 1 hates x2_

**mi darxi do .i mu'i bo mi do xebni** â _I hit you, with motivation that I
hate you._ Here the **bo** binds **mu'i** to the following bridi.

This is where the technical difference between tense sumtcita and other
sumtcita is relevant. You see, when binding a normal sumtcita to a bridi with
**bo** , it means that the following bridi somehow fits into the sumti place
of the sumtcita. For the reason of God Knows Why, binding one of the words
**ba** or **pu** to a bridi has the exact opposite effect. For example, in the
bridi **mi darxi do .i ba bo do cinjikca** , one would assume that the second
bridi is somehow filled into the sumti place of **ba** , meaning that the
bridi first uttered took place in the future of the second bridi. That's not
the case, however, and the correct translation of that utterance would be "I
hit you. Afterwards, you flirt". This weird rule is actually one of the main
obstacles to a unification of all sumtcita into one single word class. Another
difference is that tense-sumtcita can be elided, even though they apply. This
rule makes more sense, since we often can assume bridi is placed in a time and
space, but we can't assume that the sumtcita of BAI applies.

The unofficial word **me'oi** is equivalent to me la'e **zo'oi** , which means
that it converts the content of the next word into a selbri. It is used to
invent brivla on the fly: **mi ca zgana la me'oi X-files** for _I now watch
X-files_. Like **zo'oi** and **la'oi** , it doesn't allow space, periods (or
pauses in speech) inside.

The word **gi** is strage kind of bridi separator, analogous to **.i** , but
to my knowledge, it is used in only two different kinds of constructs: Most
often with logical connectives, explained in lesson twenty-five, but also with
sumtcita. With sumtcita it creates a useful, but hardly seen, construct:

**mu'i gi BRIDI-1 gi BRIDI-2** , which is equivalent to **BRIDI-2 .i mu'i bo
BRIDI-1**. Therefore, the example above, which explained why I hit you, can be
written **mu'i gi mi xebni do gi mi darxi do** , or to preserve the same order
as the original sentence, we can convert **mu'i** with **se** : **se mu'i gi
mi darxi do gi mi xebni do**.

It is in examples like this that **gi** really can show its versatility. It
does not just separate two bridi like **.i** does, but can also separate two
constructs within a bridi, making all constructs outside the scope of **gi**
apply to both bridi, as this example demonstrates:

    **cinba** = _x 1 kisses x2 at locus x3_

**mi ge prami do gi cinba do** leaves **mi** outside the construct, making it
apply to both bridi. This can also be done with **do** , which is also present
in broth bridi: **mi ge prami gi cinba vau do**. Note that **vau** is needed
to make do appear outside the second bridi.

Thus, we can write the original sentence shorter: **mi mu'i gi xebni gi darxi
vau do** , or, to omit even the **vau** , we can write it even shorter and
more elegantly: **mi do mu'i gi xebni gi darxi**

## Lesson 21: **COI**

In this lesson, you will familiarize yourself with vocatives, or **ma'oi
coi**. They get their own lesson, not because understanding these provides a
basis for understanding Lojban grammar in general, or because they are hard to
understand, but rather because they are very often used in casual speech, and
there are a lot of them.

A vocative is used partly to define who **do** refers to. If the vocative is
followed by a cmevla, the cmevla gets an implied la in front of it. If a
selbri follows, a **le** is used as a gadri instead.

In these examples, I will use the vocative **coi** , with means _Hi_ or
_Hello_.

If a person is called **la + SELBRI** , using a vocative with only the selbri
to address that person will mean you refer to her as actually being the x1 of
that selbri, which is often wrong. If, for instance, a person is called **la
tsani** , _Sky_ , saying **coi tsani** refers to her as a **le tsani** ,
meaning _Hi, you sky_ , while **coi la tsani** correctly refers to her as
someone called "Sky", meaning _Hi Sky_. This is a frequent mistake, especially
among new Lojbanists.

All vocatives have a famyma'o which is sometimes required. This is **do'u**.
It's mostly used if both the first word after the vocative phrase and the last
word of the phrase is a selbri, so that it prevents forming a tanru:

    **do'u** = _End vocative phrase. Usually elidable._
    **klaku** = _x 1 cries x2 (tears) for reason x3_
**coi la gleki do'u klaku fi ma**  
 _Hello Happy. Why are you crying?_  
---  
  
The generic vocative, **doi** , does nothing except defining who is being
referred to by **do** :

**xu doi .ernsyt. do dotco merko**  
 _Ernst, are you a German-American?_  
---  
  
All the other vocatives have some content beside defining **do**. **coi** ,
which you know, also means _Hello_ , for example. Many of the vocatives have
two or three definitions like the attitudinals. Like attitudinals, this is
because they can be modified with **cu'i** and **nai** , though only one
vocative has the **cu'i** -form defined.

Some important vocatives are listed in the table below. There are others, but
those are not used much.

vocative  | Without suffix  | cu'i  | nai   
---|---|---|---  
coi  | Hello  |  |   
co'o  | Goodbye  |  |   
je'e  | Understood / OK  |  | Not understood   
fi'i  | Welcome  |  | Not welcome here   
pe'u  | Please  |  |   
ki'e  | Thanks  |  | Disappreciation   
re'i  | Ready to recieve  |  | Not ready   
ju'i  | Hey!  | At ease  | Ignore me   
ta'a  | Interruption  |  |   
vi'o  | Will do  |  | Will not do   
ke'o  | Please repeat  |  | No repeat needed   
di'ai  | well-wish  |  | curse   
  
Notice that **di'ai** is experimental

What would **coi co'o** mean?

Answer: _Greetings in passing_ or _Hello and Goodbye_

**je'e** is used as _OK_ , but also the appropriate response when receiving
praise or thanks (at least, if you want to be modest), as it indicates that
the praise or thanks was successfully understood.

Translate **ki'e sidju be mi bei lo vajni .i je'e .jenifyn.**

    **sidju** = _x 1 helps x2 do x3_

Answer: _Thanks, you helper of me to do something important._ _No problem,
Jennifer_

And **fi'i te vecnu .i e'o do citka**

Answer: _Welcome, buyer. Please eat!_

**re'i** is used to signal that you are ready to be spoken to. It can be used
as the Lojban equivalent of _What can I do for you?_ or perhaps replace
_Hello_ , when speaking on a phone. **re'i nai** can mean _AFK_ or _Be there
is a second._

Translate: _Hello, what can I do for you, Interpreter/Translater?_

Answer: **coi re'i la fanva**

**ta'a** is used when attempting to politely interrupt someone else. What
would be good responses to this?

Translate: **ta'a ro do mi co'a cliva**

    **cliva** = _x 1 leaves x2 via route x3_

Answer: _Excuse me for interrupting, everyone. I begin to leave now_ Notice
that no famyma'o or **.i** is needed.

**ke'o** is used a lot when inexperienced Lojbanists speak together vocally.
It's quite a handy word

    **sutra** = _x 1 is quick at doing x2_

Translate: **.y ke'o sutra tavla**

Answer: _Uh, Please repeat, you quick speaker._

And _Okay okay, I got it already! I'll do it!_

An answer: **ke'o nai .ui nai vi'o**

## Lesson 22: Quantifying sumti

Most other learning materials such as The Complete Lojban Language and Lojban
for Beginners were written before the official adoptation "xorlo", a change in
the rules about gadri definition and gadri quantification. The obsoleteness of
some of the text in the older learning materials was a major cause for the
motivation to write these lessons. Unfortunately for me, quantification of
sumti can become a very complex topic when the implications of certain rules
are discussed in detail. In order to fulfill the goal of this text being
accurate enough to represent the official "gold standard" BPFK rules, this
chapter was among the last ones finished and the ones most frequenty
rewritten. I strongly encourage anyone who finds mistakes in this text to
contact me in order for them to be corrected.

Having said that disclaimer, let's get started:

The first concept you should know about is "distributivity". In lesson
fourteen I used the word "individuals" about a group of objects considered
distributively. A group of objects considered distributively means that the
selbri in question apply to each of the objects. This stands in contrast to
non-distributivity (which masses have), in which the group has other
properties than each of the individuals do. The distinction between
distributivity (individual-like) and non-distributivity (mass-like) is of
relevance when quantifying sumti.

Sometimes it's also mentioned how one sumti can distribute over another sumti,
so I'll include this as well. What it means is that if sumti A stands in
relation X to sumti B, with sumti A distributing over sumti B, then each A
stands in relation X to B. Let's have an example in English:

_Three dogs bite two men._  
---  
  
If the dogs distribute over the men, then each of three dogs has bitten two
men, meaning that between 2 and 6 different men was bitten (since one really
unlucky man could have been bitten by all three dogs), whereas if the men
distribute over then dogs, then two men were each bitten by tree dogs, fixing
the number of men to 2, but allowing between 3 and 6 dogs.

When there can be any doubt as to which sumti distributes over which, the rule
is _that the first mentioned sumti always distributes over the last
mentioned_. This is irrespective of place structure, so if x1 and x2 are
switched with **se** , x2, which is mentioned first, will distribute over x1.

Now, back to quantification. Let us first consider how one can quantify
description sumti, which are sumti of the form GADRI BRIVLA. The number string
which does the quantification can be placed before the gadri, in which case it
is referred to as an _outer quantifier_ , and it can be placed between the
gadri and the brivla, in which case it's an _inner quantifier_. Any kind of
number string can act as a quantifier.

The rules for how inner and outer quantifiers affects sumti depend on the kind
of gadri which is used:

  * **lo** and **le**. An inner quantifier tells us how many objects are being spoken of - how many objects are in the discourse total. If an outer quantifier is present, the sumti is distributed over that amount of objects. As stated earlier, if no outer quantifier is present, it's vague how many objects the selbri applies to (though not none), and whether it does so distributively or non-distributively. Examples are always a good idea, so here they are:

**mu lo mu bakni cu se jirna** \- The inner quantifier of five tells us that
we speak about five pieces of cattle, and the outer quantifier of five tells
us that the selbri is true for each of the five. Therefore, it means "All the
five cows had horns".

    **bakni** = _x 1 is a cow/ox/cattle/calf etc of breed x2_

    **jirna** = _x 1 is the horn of x2 (metaphor: any pointed extremity)_

What does the following bridi mean?

**lo ru'urgubupu be li re pi ze mu cu jdima lo pa re sovda**

    **ru'urgubupu** = _x 1 is measures to be x2 British pounds (GBP)_
    **jdima** = _x 1 is the price of x2 to buyer x3 set by vendor x4_
    **sovda** = _x 1 is a gamete (egg/sperm) of x2_

Answer:  "Twelve eggs cost 2.75 British pounds" which, as the English
translation, could mean both that they cost 2.75 each (distributively) or that
all twelve together cost 2.75 (non-distributively)

**so le ta pa pa ci'erkei cu clamau mi** (notice that the **ta** goes before
the inner quantifier)

    **ci'erkei** = _x 1 plays game x2 governed by rules x3 interrelating game parts x4 {this is used to translate "play" in the sense "play a game" rather than, for instance "playing pretend" or "playing House"_}

    **clamau** = _x 1 is taller/longer than x2 in direction x3 my marigin x4_

Answer: The inner states there are 11 players in the discourse, and the outer
states that the selbri applies to nine of them distributively. Thus it means
"Nine of the eleven players are taller than me"

There are a few points that needs to be raised regarding quantification of
**lo** /**le** :

Using **lo** with an outer quantifier, "{number} **lo** {selbri}", works like
"{number} {selbri}" in that it quantifies over individuals. Therefore, both
**ci gerku cu batci re nanmu** and **ci lo gerku cu batci re lo nanmu**
consider both the group of dogs and the group of men distributively.
Therefore, each of the three dogs bit each of the two men, with six biting
events in total.

(_{number}**lo** {selbri}_ is defined as _{number} da poi me lo {selbri}_ ,
while _{number} {selbri}_ is _{number} da poi {selbri}_. **da** and **me**
will be explained later. Put simply, the **lo** version takes context into
account more than the bare number version, which quantifies over anything and
everything that fits in the selbri's x1.)

    **batci** = _x 1 bites/pinches x2 at locus x3 using x4 as pinching tool._

Secondly: What if there is no outer quantifier? Does this mean that it _is_
there, but it's elided? Nope. If there is any kind of outer quantifier, elided
or not, it would force the sumti to be distributive, which would mean that
neither **lo** nor **le** could be used with predicates that apply
collectively. Therefore, if no outer quantifier is present, it's not only
elided - it's simply not there. Sumti without an outer quantifier can be
referred to as "constants".

Thirdly, it makes no sense to have an outer quantifier which is larger than
the inner one. It means that the selbri holds true for more sumti than are
present in the discourse - but since they appear in a bridi, they _are_ part
of the discourse. It's grammatical to do it, though.

Lastly, placing a **lo** or a **le** in front of a sumti is grammatical, if
there is an inner quantifier present. "**lo** /**le** {number} {sumti}" is
defined as "**lo** /**le** {number} **me** {sumti}".

So what would this mean? **mi nelci lo mi briju kansa .i ku'i ci lo re mu ji'i
ri cu lazni**

    **briju** = _x 1 is an office for worker x2 at location x3_
    **kansa** = _x 1 accompanies x2 in action/state/enterprise x3_
    **lazni** = _x 1 is lazy, avoiding work concerning x2_

Answer: "I like my co-workers, but three out of about twenty five of them are
lazy"

  * **la**. An inner quantifier is grammatical if the name is a selbri - in this case, it's considered part of the name. An outer quantifier is used to quantify distributively over such individuals (much like **lo** /**le**) It's grammatical when placed in front of {number} {sumti}, in which case, the both the number and the sumti is considered the name.

Translate this: **re la ci bargu cu jibni le mi zdani**

Answer:  Two "The Three Arches" are located close to my house" (Perhaps The
Three Arches are a kind of restaurant?)

  * **loi** and **lei**. An inner quantifier tells us how many members there are in the mass/masses in question. An outer quantifier quantifies distributively {!} over these masses

Notice here that while masses consist of a number of objects considered non-
distributively, an outer quantifier always treats each of these masses as an
individual.

When placed before a number string, then a sumti, **loi** /**lei** is defined
as "**lo gunma be lo** /**le** {number} {sumti}" - "The mass consisting of the
{number} of {sumti}".

Attempt to translate this: **dei joi di'e gunma re loi bi valsi .i ca'e dei
jai se jalge lo nu jetnu**

    **gunma** = _x 1 is a mass of the individuals x2_

    **valsi** = _x 1 is a word, meaning x2 in language x3_

    **ca'e** = _Attitudinal: Evidential: I define_

    **jetnu** = _x 1 is true according to metaphysics/epistemology x2_

Answer:  "This very utterance, mixed together with the next one, forms a mass,
consisting of two individual masses each of eight words. I define: This very
utterance causes {it} to be true."

  * **lai**. Much like **la** , an inner quantifier (when name is a selbri) is part of the name. An outer one quantifies distributively. Before a number+sumti, both the sumti and the number make up the name.

When a fraction is used as an outer quantifier to quantify **loi** , **lei**
or **lai** , one speaks about only part of one mass (for instance, "half of
the Johnsons" - **pi mu lai .djansyn.**).

  * **lo'i** and **le'i**. An inner quantifier describes the amount of members of the set. An outer quantifies distributively over several of such sets. When placed before a number and a sumti, it's defined as "**lo selcmi be** lo**/** le _{number} {sumti}" - "The set of {number} {sumti}"._

Translate **lo'i ro se cinki cu bramau la'a pa no no lo'i ro se bogykamju
jutsi**

    **cinki** = _x 1 is an insect of species x2_

    **la'a** = _Attitudinal: Discursive: Probably_

    **bramau** = _x 1 is bigger than x2 in dimension x3 by marigin x4_

    **bogykamju** = _x 1 is the spine of x2_

    **jutsi** = _x 1 is the species of genus x2, family x3 ... (open ended classification)_

Answer:  "The set of all the species of insects is probably bigger than one
hundred sets of all species of vertebrates"

  * **la'i**. As with **lai**

Like with the mass gadri, an outer quantifier before a set gadri enables one
to speak about a fraction of a set. In front of a number and a sumti, it's
defined as "**lo selcmi be la** {number} {sumti}" - "The set consisting of The
{Number} {Sumti}" (considered a name)

  * **lo'e** and **le'e**. Are for some reason not included in the currently accepted gadri proposal. If one were to extend the rules of another gadri, **lo** /**le** would probably be the best choice (since both operates with individuals rather than groups), and so one would expect the outer quantifier to force distributivity over the amount of typical/stereotypical things given by the inner quantifier.

When quantifying sumka'i representing several objects, it is useful to
remember that they usually behave like **lo** -sumti. By definition, "{number}
{sumti}" is defined as "{number} **da poi ke'a me** {sumti}". You will not be
familiar with **da** until a few lessons later, so take it on faith that it
means "something" in this context. Therefore, **ci mi** means "Two of those
who belong to "us"".

Some important uses of quantification requires you to be quantify selbri or
objects whose identity is unknown. This is done by "logically quantified
variables". These, as well as how to quantify them will be covered in lessons
twenty-seven.

Lastly, how can you quantify uncountable substances like sugar or water? One
solution is to quantify it using inexact numbers. This use is vague, not only
because the value of the number is vague, but also because it's not specified
on what scale you're counting: The sugar could be considered a group of many
crystals, counted one at a time, and the water could be quantified by the
amounts of raindrops it took to make the body of water in question. While this
way of counting is legitimate, it's not very exact and can easily confuse or
mislead.

A way to be explicit about non-countability is to use the null operand
**tu'o** as an inner quantifier.

    **tu'o** = _Null operand ( Ã ). Used in unary mekso._

This solution is elegant and intuitive, and also gives me an excuse to quote
this horrifying, yet comical example from the original **xorlo** -proposal:

**le nanmu cu se snuti .i ja'e bo lo tu'o gerku cu kuspe le klaji**

    **snuti** = _x 1 is an accident on the part of x2_

    **ja'e** = _sumtcita: BAI: (from**jalge**): Bridi results in {sumti}_

    **kuspe** = _x 1 spans/extends over x2_

    **klaji** = _x 1 is a road/avenue/street at x2 accessing x3_

What does it mean?

Answer:  "The man had an accident and so there was dog all over the road"

A second method of quantifying substances is to use the tenses **ve'i** ,
**ve'a** and **ve'u** as mentioned in lesson ten:

**ti ve'i djacu** \- This is a small amount of water

    **djacu** = _x 1 is an expanse of water/is made of water/contains water_

Thirdly, of course, you could use a brivla to give an exact measurement:

**le ta djacu cu ki'ogra be li re pi ki'o ki'o** \- "That water has a mass of
2.000 000 kilograms"

    **ki'ogra** = _x 1 measures in mass x2 kilograms by standard x3_

## Lesson 23: Negation

Sometimes, just saying what's the truth is not enough. Often, we want to
specify what's not the truth, and we do this by using negation.

Negation in English mostly involves _not_ , and is completely arbitrary and
ambiguous. We, as Lojbanists, can't have that, of course, so Lojban contains
an elegant and unambigious system for negating. What will be presented here
are the official gold-standard rules. Disapproval of these "golden rules"
concerning **na** is growing, and there is disagreement about what rule set
should replace it. For now, I will stick with the official rules, and
therefore, so will you, dear reader.

The first you need to know about is bridi negation, so called because it
negates the bridi it's in, saying it's not true. The way to negate a bridi is
to place **na** first in the sentence with a **ku** after it, or just before
the selbri.

    **speni** = _x 1 is married to x2 under convention x3_

Thus: **na ku le mi speni cu ninmu** states that _My spouse is not a woman_.
It states nothing about what my wife is, or if I even have a wife. It only
states that I do not have a wife who is also a woman. This has an important
implication: If the negation of a bridi is false, the bridi must be true: **na
ku le mi speni cu na ninmu** must mean that I have both a spouse, and that she
is a she.

It is possible to use bridi negations in all bridi, even the implicit bridi of
descriptive sumti. **lo na prenu** can refer to anything non-human, whether it
be a sphinx, a baseball or the property of appropriateness.

    **bau** = _sumtcita, from bangu: using the language of {sumti_}

    **se ja'e** = _sumtcita, from se jalge: because of {sumti_}

Often when using **na** , it's a problem that it negates the entire bridi. If
I say **mi na sutra tavla bau le glibau se ja'e le nu mi dotco** , I end up
negating too much, and it is not clear that I wanted to only negate that I
speak fast. The sentence could suggest that I in fact speak fast because of
some other reason, for instance that I speak fast in French because I'm
German. To express the sentence more precisely, I need to only negate that I
speak fast, and not the other things.

To only negate part of a bridi, **na ku** can be moved around the bridi and
placed anywhere a sumti can go. It then negates any sumti, selbri and sumtcita
placed after it. When placed immediately before the selbri, the **ku** can be
elided.

Moving **na ku** from the left end of the bridi and rightwards effects any
quantifiers in a certain way, as can be seen by this example:

There are forces within the Lojban community who, perhaps rightly, think that
there is no good reason that a **na** placed before a selbri negates the
entire bridi, whereas a **na ku** any other place negates only what is
trailing behind it. However, in these lessons you will be taught what is still
the official stance, namely that **na** before the selbri negates the bridi.

The use of **na ku** is exemplified with the following examples.

**na ku ro remna cu verba** _It's not true that: All humans are children_

**su'o remna na ku cu verba** _For at least one human it's not true that: It's
a child_. See that the **na ku** is placed before **cu** , since a sumti can
go only before, not after the **cu**. Had I only used **na** , it would have
to go after **cu** \- but that would have negated the entire bridi, meaning
"It's not true that: At least one human is a child".

When the **na ku** is moved rightwards, any quantifier is inverted - that is:
**ro** is turned into **su'o**. This is, of course, only if the meaning of the
bridi has to be preserved. This means that when the **na ku** is placed at the
end of the bridi, only the selbri is negated but all the sumti and sumtcita
are preserved, as can be seen by these three identical bridi:

    **ckule** = _x 1 is a school at location x2 teaching x3 to students x4 and operated by x5_

**na ku ro verba cu ve ckule fo su'o ckule** â _It's not true that all
children are students in a school._

**su'o verba cu ve ckule na ku fo su'o ckule** â _Some children are students
in not a single school._

**su'o verba cu ve ckule fo ro ckule na ku** â _Some children are for all
schools not students in them._

The opposite of **na** is **ja'a**. This is barely ever used, since it is
default in most bridi. One exception is repeated bridi (next lesson).
Sometimes it's used to put more weight on the truth of the bridi, as in **la
.bab. ja'a melbi** = "Bob is indeed beautiful".

While the mechanism of **na ku** resembles natural language negation, it can
be difficult to keep track of exactly what is negated and how that affects the
bridi. For that reason, the construct **na ku** is rarely seen anywhere other
than the beginning of a bridi. In most cases where more specific negation is
needed people resort to a different method. This method, called scalar
negation, is an elegant and intuitive tool. Using it, you effect only the
selbri, since the words used in scalar negation binds to the selbri much like
the word **se**.

The name _scalar negation_ is derived from the fact that the words which bind
to the selbri can be placed along a scale from affirmation over negation and
to stating that the opposite case is true:

These words are not negators in the same sense as **na**. They do not state
that a bridi is false, but makes a positive statement that a bridi is true â
the same bridi, but with a different selbri. This distinction is mostly
academic, though. If, for example, I state that **mi na'e se nelci** "I am
non-liked", I actually state that some selbri applies to me, which is also on
a relevant scale with the selbri **nelci**. Most of the time, we assume a
scale where the positions are mutually exclusive (like love-like-dislike-
hate), so **mi na'e se nelci** implies **mi na se nelci** Therefore, the words
**no'e** and **to'e** should only be used when the selbri is placed on some
obvious scale: **le mi speni cu to'e melbi** â _My spouse is ugly_ makes
sense, since we immediately know what the opposite of beautiful is, while **mi
klama le mi to'e zdani** â _I go to my opposite thing of home_ , while
grammatical, leaves the listener guessing what the speaker's _opposite-home_
is and should be avoided. So how can you negate only the selbri without also
implying that the selbri is correct at some other position on a truth-scale?
Simple: Moving the **na ku** to the rightmost end of the bridi, as
demonstrated a few lines above. This feature is very useful. Some Lojbanists
prefer to prefix the rafsi **nar** (the rafsi of **na**) in front of the
selbri - this has the same effect, but I advise against it, because it makes
familiar brivla seem alien, and it's harder to understand when spoken
casually. If a situation arises where you need to negate only the selbri, but
want it to be clear before the end of the bridi, the experimental cmavo
**na'ei** , which grammatically works like **na'e** , can be used _**na'ei**_
: Negates the following selbri only Try to translate these sentences: _My
spouse is not a woman_ (meaning that he is a male) Answer: **le mi speni cu
na'e / to'e ninmu**. Using scalar negation here implies that he exists, which
na did not._My spouse is not really a woman_ Answer: **le mi speni cu no'e
ninmu**. The scale here is presumed to be from woman to man._I don't speak
fast in English because I'm German_ Answer: **mi na'e sutra tavla bau le
glibau se ja'e le nu mi dotco** Also, note that whenever these words are used
together with a tanru, they only affect the leftmost selbri. In order to make
it bind to the whole tanru or parts of the tanru, the usual tanru-grouping
words can be used. Try to say _I sell something which is not yellow homes_
using the tanru **pelxu zdani vecnu** Answer: **mi na'e ke pelxu zdani ke'e
vecnu or mi na'e pelxu bo zdani vecnu** When attempting to answer: _Is the
king of the USA fat?_ , all of these negations fail. While it's technically
correct to negate it with **na** , since it makes no assumptions of that is
true, it's mildly misleading since it could lead the listener to believe there
is a king of the USA. For these scenarios, there is a metalinguistic negator,
**na'i**.

    **na'i** = _metalinguistic negator. Something is wrong with assigning a truth value to the bridi._
Because **na'i** can be needed anywhere it has been given the grammar of the
attitudinals, which means it can appear anywhere, and it attaches to the
previous word or construct.

    **palci** = _x 1 is evil by standard x2_
**le na'i pu te zukte be le skami cu palci**  
 _The sought goal {mistake!} of the computer was evil _, probably protests
that computers can seek a goal volitionally.__  
---  
  
Since this is a lesson on negation, I believe the word **nai** deserves a
short mention. It is used to negate minor grammatical constructs, and can be
used in combination with attitudinals, all sumtcita including tenses,
vocatives and logical connectives. The rules for negating using **nai** depend
on the construct, and so the effect of **nai** has been discussed when
mentioning the construct themselves. The exception is sumtcita, where the
rules for negation are more complex, and will not be discussed here.

_Note:_ At the time of writing, it has been proposed to move **nai** to the
selma'o CAI, which means the semantics of **nai** depend on which selma'o it
follows.

## Lesson 24: brika'i/pro-bridi and **ko'a**

If I say that I'm called Mikhail, **zo .mikail. cmene mi** , and you have to
say the exact same bridi, what would that be? One of the many answers is **do
se cmene zo .mikail.**. For the bridi to be the same, you have to replace
**mi** with **do** , and it doesn't matter which if you say the bridi with the
**se** -converted selbri or not. This is because a bridi is not the words
which express it â a bridi is an idea, an abstract proposition. The word
**mi** when I say it and the word **do** when you do refers to the same sumti,
so the two bridi are identical.

This lesson is on **brika'i** , the bridi equivalent of sumka'i. They are word
which represent entire bridi. Here it is important to remember that a bridi
consists only of sumti and the things which contain the sumti, selbri and
sumtcita. Neither attitudinals, nor the semantic layer of **ko** or **ma** are
part of the bridi proper, and so these are not represented by a **brika'i**.

There are much fewer **brika'i** than there are sumka'i. We will begin by
going through some of the words in the most used series, called GOhA:

    **go'u** = _Repeats remote past bridi_
    **go'a** = _Repeats past bridi_
    **go'e** = _Repeats next-to-last bridi_
    **go'i** = _Repeats last mentioned bridi_
    **go'o** = _Repeats future bridi_
    **nei** = _Repeats current bridi_
    **no'a** = _Repeats outer bridi_

Some of the GOhA-**brika'i**. Notice the familiar **i** , **a** , **u**
-pattern for close in past, medium in past and distant in past.

These are very much like the sumka'i **ri** , **ra** and **ru**. They can only
refer to main bridi of jufra, and not those contained in relative phrases or
description sumti. The main bridi can contain a relative phrase, of course,
but a **brika'i** can never be used to refer to only the relative phrase.

A GOhA acts grammatically much like a selbri, any construct which can apply to
selbri can also apply to these. The place structure of a GOhA is the same as
that of the bridi it represents, and the sumti are by default the same as in
the bridi it represents. Filling the sumti places of a GOhA explicitly
overwrites the sumti of the bridi it represents. Contrast:

A: **mi citka lo plise** B: **go'i** â _I eat an apple._ _You do._ with

A: **mi citka lo plise** B: **mi go'i** â _I eat an apple._ _I do, too._

These **brika'i** are very useful when answering a question with **xu** :

A: **xu do nelci le mi speni** B: **go'i / na go'i** â _Do you like my wife?_
_Yes./No._. The **xu** , being an attitudinal, is not copied.

When repeating bridi negated by **na** , that is: Bridi where **na** is placed
in the prenex (lesson twenty-seven), in the beginning of the bridi or right
before the selbri, the rules for copying over **na** are different from what
one might expect. Any **na** is copied over, but any additional **na** in the
brika'i replaces the first na. Let me show you with an example:

A: **mi na citka lo plise**

B: **mi go'i** = **mi na citka lo plise**

C: **mi na go'i** = **mi na citka lo plise**

D: **mi na na go'i** = **mi citka lo plise** = **mi ja'a go'i**

**nei** and **no'a** are not used much, except for _mind-breaking purposes_ ,
which is making up bridi which are hard to parse, like **dei na se du'u le
no'a la'e le nei**. Since **nei** repeats the current outer bridi, however,
**le nei** can be used to refer to the x1 of the current outer bridi, **le se
nei** the x2 and so on.

When using **brika'i** , one must always be wary of copying sentences with the
personal sumka'i like **mi** , **do** , **ma'a** ect, and be careful not to
repeat them when they are in the wrong contect, as shown in the two examples
with apple eating above. Instead of replacing them one by one, though, the
word **ra'o** anywhere in the bridi updates the personal sumka'i so that they
apply for the speaker's perspective:

A: **mi do prami** B: **mi do go'i** is equivalent to A: **mi do prami** B:
**go'i ra'o**

    **ra'o** = _Update all personal sumka'i so that they now fit the speaker's point of view._

The only other series of brika'i are very easy to remember:

    **broda** = _Bridi variable 1_
    **brode** = _Bridi variable 2_
    **brodi** = _Bridi variable 3_
    **brodo** = _Bridi variable 4_
    **brodu** = _Bridi variable 5_
    **cei** = _Define bridi variable (not a brika'i and not in BRODA)_

The first five are just five instances of the same word. They can be used as
shortcuts to bridi. After saying a bridi, saying **cei broda** defines that
bridi as **broda** , and **broda** can then be used as **brika'i** for that
bridi in the following conversation.

While we're at it, there is an analogous series of sumka'i, which probably
does not belong in this lesson, but here they are anyway:

**ko'a** | Sumti variable 1  | **fo'a** | Sumti variable 6   
---|---|---|---  
**ko'e** | Sumti variable 2  | **fo'e** | Sumti variable 7   
**ko'i** | Sumti variable 3  | **fo'i** | Sumti variable 8   
**ko'o** | Sumti variable 4  | **fo'o** | Sumti variable 9   
**ko'u** | Sumti variable 5  | **fo'u** | Sumti variable 10   
  
as well as the **cei** -equivalent for this series:

    **goi** = _Define sumti variable_

These are used like the **brika'i** -series. Just place, for instance, **goi
ko'u** after a sumti, and that sumti can be referred to by **ko'u**.

Strangely, these series are rarely used for their intended purpose. They are,
however, used as arbitrary selbri and sumti in example texts, where **broda**
and **brode** mean "any selbri A" and "any selbri B" and similarly for
**ko'a** and friends:

_So, is it true that the truth conditions of**ko'a ko'e broda na ku** are
always the same as **na ku ko'a ko'e broda**?_ _Nope, it isn't._

## Lesson 25: Logical connectives

If you ask a Lojbanist: _Do you want milk or sugar in your coffee?_ she'll
answer: _Correct._

Witty as this joke might be, it illustrates a weird property of the English
way of asking this question. It is phrased as a true/false question, but it
really isn't. In Lojban, we can't have this kind of inconsistency, and so we
must find another way of asking this kind of question. If you think about it,
it's pretty hard to find a good and easy way, and it seems Lojban have picked
a good way instead of an easy way.

To explain it, let us take two separate bridi: Bridi 1: _I like milk in my
coffee_ and bridi 2: _I like sugar in my coffee_. Both of these bridi can have
the state true or false. This yields four combinations of which bridi is/are
true:

A ) 1 and 2 B ) 1 but not 2

C ) 2 but not 1 D )neither 1 nor 2

I, in actuality, like milk in my coffee, and I'm indifferent as to whether
there is sugar in it or not. Therefore, my preference can be written A ) true
B ) true C ) false D ) false, since both A and B yields true for me, but
neither C nor D does. A more compact way of writing my coffee preferences
would be TTFF for true, true, false, false. Similarly, a person liking his
coffee black and unsweetened would have a coffee preference of FFFT. This
combitation of "true" and "false" is called a _truth function_ , in this case
for the two statements _I like milk in my coffee_ and _I like sugar in my
coffee_. Note that the order of the statements matters.

In Lojban, we operate with 4 truth functions, which we consider fundamental:

A: TTTF (and/or)

O: TFFT (if and only iff)

U: TTFF (whether or not)

E: TFFF (and)

In this example, they would translate to something like: A:_Just not black
coffee_ , O: _Either both milk or sugar, or nothing for me, please_ , U:
_Milk, and I don't care about if there's sugar or not_ and E: _Milk and sugar,
please._.

In Lojban, you place the word for the truth function between the two bridi,
selbri or sumti in question. That word is called a logical connective. The
words for truth functions between sumti (and just for sumti!) are **.a**
**.o** **.u** and **.e**. How nice. For instance: _I am friends with an
American and a German_ would be **lo merko .e lo dotco cu pendo mi**.

How would you say: _I speak to you and no one else?_

Answer: **mi tavla do .e no drata** Note that this actually states that it's
true that "I speak to you".

One more: _I like cheese whether or not I like coffee_

    **ckafi** = _x 1 is a quantity/contains coffee from source/of grain x2_

Answer: **mi nelci lo'e cirla .u lo'e ckafi**

You can perhaps deduce that there are sixteen possible truth functions, so we
need to learn twelve more in order to know them all. Eight more can be
obtained by negating either the first sentence or the second. The first is
negated by prefixing the truth function word with **na** , the second is
negated by placing **nai** after the word. For example, since **.e**
represents TFFF, **.e nai** must be _both 1 is true and 2 is false_ , which is
FTFF. Similarly, **na .a** is _Just not: 1 is true and 2 is false_ , which is
TTFT. Doing this type of conversion in the head real-time is very, very hard,
so perhaps one should focus on learning how logical connectives work in
general, and then learn the logical connectives themselves by heart.

Four functions cannot be made this way: TTTT, TFTF, FTFT and FFFF. The first
and the last cannot be made using logical connectives at all, but they are
kind of useless anyway. Using a hypothetical logical connective in the
sentence _I like milk FFFF sugar in my coffee_ is equivalent to saying _I
don't like coffee_ , just more complicated. The last two, TFTF and FTFT, can
be made by prefixing **.u** with good ol' **se** , which just reverts the two
statements. **se .u** , for instance is _B whether or not A_ , which is TFTF.
The final list of all logical connectives can be seen below.

TTTT: Cannot be made

TTTF: **.a**

TTFT: **.a nai**

TTFF: **.u** OR **.u nai**

TFTT: **na .a**

TFTF: **se .u**

TFFT: **.o** OR **na .o nai**

TFFF: **.e**

FTTT: **na .a nai**

FTTF: **na .o** OR **.o nai**

FTFT: **se .u nai**

FTFF: **.e nai**

FFTT: **na .u** OR **na .u nai**

FFTF: **na .e**

FFFT: **na .e nai**

FFFF: Cannot be made

Logically, saying a sentence with a logical connective, like for instance **mi
nelci lo'e cirla .e nai lo'e ckafi** is equivalent to saying two bridi, which
are connected with the same logical connective: **mi nelci lo'e cirla .i {E
NAI} mi nelci lo'e ckafi**. This is how the function of logical connectives is
defined. We will get to how to apply logical connectives to bridi in a moment.

By putting a _j_ in front of the core word of a logical connective, it
connects two selbri. An example is **mi ninmu na jo nanmu** _I am a man or a
woman, but not both_

    **ninmu** = _x 1 is a woman_

This is _tanru-internal_ , meaning that it loosely binds selbri together, even
when they form a tanru: **lo dotco ja merko prenu** means _a German or
American man_ , and is parsed **lo** (**dotco ja merko**) **prenu**. This
binding is slightly stronger that normal tanru-grouping (still weaker than
specific grouping-words), and as such, **lo dotco ja merko ninmu ja nanmu** is
parsed **lo** (**dotco ja merko**) (**ninmu ja nanmu**). The selbri logical
connectives can also be attached to **.i** in order to connect two sentences
together: **la .kim. cmene mi .i ju mi nanmu** _I'm called Kim, whether or not
I'm a man_. The combination **.i je** states that both sentences are true,
much like we would assume had no logical connective been present.

Unfairly hard question: Using logical connectives, how would you translate _If
you're called Bob, you're a man._?

Answer: **zo .bab. cmene do .i na ja do nanmu** or _Either you're not named
Bob and a man, or you're not named Bob and not a man, or you're named Bob and
a man. But you can't be named Bob and not be a man._ The only combination not
permitted is: _You're called Bob, but not a man._ This must mean that, if it's
true that you're called Bob, you must be a man.

If we try to translate the sad, sad event of _I cried and gave away my dog_ ,
we run into a problem.

Attempting to say the sentence with a **je** between the selbri _gave_ and
_cried_ , would mean the same word for word, but unfortunately mean that _I
cried the dog and gave away the dog_ , cf. the definition of logical
connectives. One can cry tears or even blood, but crying dogs is just silly.

However, we can get around by using bridi-tail logical connectives. What they
do is that any previous sumtcita and sumti attaches to both selbri bound by
the bridi-tail logical connective, but any following sumti or sumtcita only
applies to the last mentioned: The bridi splits up from one head to two tails,
to speak metaphorically.

The form of a bridi-tail logical connective is gi'V, with the V for the vowel
of the truth function.

How could you correctly translate the English sentence to Lojban?

Answer: **mi pu klaku gi'e dunda le mi gerku**

What does **ro remna cu palci gi'o zukte lo palci** mean?

    **palci** = _x 1 is evil by standard x2_

Answer: _People are evil if and only if they do evil things._

Furthermore, there is a forethought all-but tanru internal group of connecters
made by prefixing _g_ in front of the truth function vowel. _Forethought_ in
this context means that they need to go in front of the things they connect,
and thus you need to think about the grammatical structure of the sentence
before saying it. All-but tanru internal means that it serves both as a
connective between sumti, bridi, selbri and bridi-tails, but not between two
selbri of one tanru. Let me show you how it works, rewriting the Lojban
sentence above:

**go lo remna cu palci gi lo remna cu zukte lo palci**

The first logical connective in these kinds of constructs are what carries the
vowel which signal what truth function is being used. The second logical
connective is always **gi** , and like **.i** , it has no truth function. It
simply serves to separate the two terms being connected. If you want to negate
the first or second sentence, a **nai** is suffixed to either the first (for
the first sentence) or second (for the second sentence) logical connective.

Provided that the constructs are terminated properly, it has remarkable
flexibility, as the following few examples demonstrate:

**mi go klama gi cadzu vau le mi zdani** _I go, if and only if walk, to my
home_ or _I can only go to my home by walking._ Notice that the **vau** is
needed to make le mi zdani apply to both **cadzu** and **klama**.

**se gu do gi nai mi bajra le do ckule** _Whether or not you, then not I, run
to your school_ or _I won't run to your school no matter if you do or not_

The tanru-internal equivalent of gV is gu'V. These are exactly the same,
except that they are exclusively tanru-internal, and that they bind a selbri
to the **gi** tighter than normal tanru-grouping, but weaker than explicit
binding-sumti:

**la xanz.krt. gu'e merko gi dotco nanmu** is equivalent to

**la xanz.krt. merko je dotco nanmu**

And so you've read page up and page down just to get the necessary knowledge
in order to be able to learn how to ask _Would you like milk or sugar in your
coffee?_ in Lojban. Simply place a question logical connective instead of
another logical connective, and like **ma** , it asks the listener to fill in
a correct response. Unfortunately, these question-logical connectives don't
always match the morphological pattern of the logical connectives they ask
for:

    **ji** = _Logical connective question: Asks for a sumti logical connective (A)_
    **je'i** = _Logical connective question: Asks for a tanru-internal selbri logical connective (JA)_
    **gi'i** = _Logical connective question: Asks for a bridi-tail logical connective (GIhA)_
    **ge'i** = _Logical connective question: Asks for a forethought all-but tanru internal logical connective (GA)_
    **gu'i** = _Logical connective question: Asks for a forethought only tanru internal logical connective (GUhA)_

So... how would you ask if the persons wants milk or sugar in her coffee?

    **ladru** = _x 1 is/contains milk from source x2_
    **sakta** = _x 1 is/contains sugar from source x2 of composition x3_

Possible answer: **sakta je'i ladru le do ckafi** though I guess something
more English and less elegant could also suffice like **do djica lenu lo sakta
ji lo ladru cu nenri le do ckafi**

## Lesson 26: Non-logical connectives

The word "logical" in "logical connective" refers to the association a logical
connective has with a truth function. Not all useful connectives can be
defined through a truth function, however, and so there are other connectives
beside the logical ones.

The meaning of a logical connective is defined the same as two different bridi
connected with that logical connective. For instance, **mi nitcu do .a la
.djan.** is defined to be equivalent to **mi nitcu do .i ja mi nitcu la
.djan.**. This definition is useful to bear in mind, because it implies that
sometimes, sumti cannot be connected with logical connectives without chaning
the meaning. Consider the sentence: "Jack and Joe wrote this play." One
attempt at a translation would be: **ti draci fi la .djak. e la .djous.**

    **draci** = _x 1 is a drama/play about x2 by writer/dramatist x3 for audience x4 with actors x5_

The problem with this translation is that it means **ti draci la .djak. ije ti
draci la .djous.** , which is not really true. Neither Jack nor Joe wrote it,
they did so together. What we want here is of course a mass, and some way to
join Jack and Joe in one mass. This has little to do with a truth function so
we must use a non-logical connective, which are of selma'o JOI. We'll return
to this Jack and Joe-problem in a little - first: Four of the known JOI:

The Lojban connective joins sumti and forms a:

The functions of these words are simple: **lo'i remna jo'u lo'i gerku**
considers both the set of humans and the set of dogs distributively (as
individuals). Remember from lesson twenty-two (quantifiers) that
"distributivity" means that what is true for the group is also true for each
of the individuals alone. Similarly **loi ro gismu ce'o loi ro lujvo ce'o loi
ro fu'ivla** is a sequence consisting of the mass of all gismu, followed by
the mass of all lujvo, followed by the mass of all fu'ivla. As with all of the
JOI which has an inherent order, **se** may be put before **ce'o** to inverse
the order: "A **ce'o** B" is the same as "B se **ce'o** A". How can you
correctly translate "Jack and Joe wrote this play"? Answer:  **ti draci fi la
.djak. joi la .djous.** The cmavo of JOI are very flexible: They can act both
as sumti connectives and tanru-internal connectives, so they can be used to
connect sumti, selbri and bridi. This flexibility means that one must be
careful to use famyma'o correctly when using a JOI. What is wrong with the
bridi **lo dotco jo'u mi cu klama la dotco gugde**? Answer:  **jo'u** is put
after a selbri, so it expects a selbri after it to connect to, but none is
found. Had a **ku** been present before the connective, it would have been
grammatical If several JOI are used, **bo** and/or **ke** may be used to
override the usual left-grouping:  **mi joi do ce'o la .djak. joi bo la
.djous. cu pu'o ci'erkei damba lei xunre**  
 _Me and you, and then Jack and Joe are about the play against the reds_  
---  
  
Contrast it with

**mi joi do ce'o la .djak. joi la .djous. cu pu'o ci'erkei damba lei xunre**  
 _First me and you, then Jack will together with Joe play against the reds._  
---  
  
Connecting bridi with JOI can make some interesting implications of the
relationship between the bridi:

**la .djak. morsi ri'a lo nu ri dzusoi .i joi le jemja'a po ri cu bebna**  
 _Jack is dead because he was a infantry soldier and his general was an
idiot._  
---  
  
implying that these two bridi massed together was the physical cause of his
death: Had he only been in an armored vehicle or with a competent commander,
he might had survived.

    **dzusoi** = _x 1 is an infantry soldier of army x2_
    **jemja'a** = _x 1 is a general of army x2 in function x3_
    **bebna** = _x 1 is foolish/idiotic in property/aspect x2_

Non-logical connectives may also be negated with **nai** , indicating that
some other connective is appropriate: **lo djacu ce'o nai .e'o lo ladru cu
cavyfle fi le mi tcati** \- "Please don't pour first water then milk in my
tea". This, of course, says nothing about which connective is appropriate -
one might guess **se ce'o** (first milk, then water), only to find out that
**.e nai** (only water, no milk at all) was the correct one.

    **cavyfle** = _x 1, consisting of x2, flows into x3 from x4_

Just like a logical connective is a plausible negation of a non-logical
connective, answers to questions of the type **ji** or **je'i** can be both
logical and non-logical: A: **ladru je'i sakta le do ckafi** B: **se ce'o**
("Milk or sugar in you coffee?" "First the latter, then the former"). In this
case **ce** would make no sense at all, since sets can't be contained in
coffee, and **joi** (both mixed together) would mean the same as **jo'u**
(both of them), unless the respondant preferred unmixed sugar in his coffee.

The fifth JOI I present here is a bit of an oddball:

    **fa'u** = _Non-logical connective: Unmixed ordered distribution (A and B, respectively)_

When only one **fa'u** is placed within a bridi (or several bridi connected
together with connectors), **fa'u** may be assumed to be identical to
**jo'u**. When several **fa'u** is used within one bridi, however, the
constructs before **fa'u** each apply to each other, and the constructs after
**fa'u** each apply to each other. Let's have an example:

**mi fa'u do rusko fa'u kadno**  
 _You and I are Russian and Canadian_  
---  
  
implying that **mi** goes with **rusko** and **do** goes with **kadno** , and
implying nothing about any other combination. Of course, in this example, it
would be much easier to say **mi rusko .i do kadno**.

These last three JOI connects two sets to make new sets:

    **jo'e** = _A union B_
    **ku'a** = _A intersection B_
    **pi'u** = _Cross product of A and B_

These are probably not very useful for the average Lojbanist, but I might as
well include them here.

The first one, **jo'e** , contains all the members of set A and those of set
B. If anything is a member of both sets, they are not counted twice.

A set made with **ku'a** makes a new set from two sets. This new set contains
only those members which are in both sets.

**pi'u** is a little more complicated. A set "A **pi'u** B" contains all the
possible combinations of "a **ce'o** b", where a is a member of A and b is a
member of B. It is thus a set of sequences of members. If, for instance, set A
contained the members p and q, and set B contained members f and g, then A
**pi'u** B would be a set consisting of the four members p **ce'o** f, p
**ce'o** g, q **ce'o** f and q **ce'o** g.

## Lesson 27: Lojban logicË **da** , **bu'a** , **zo'u** , and terms

Here we are starting to talk about advanced Lojban. The Lojban in this and
following lessons is rarely relevant when speaking Lojban in normal contexts,
but it pops up quite often when speaking about language and logic.

These corners of Lojban is for the most part experimental, new or complex, so
you should expect a lot of changing definitions, outdated definitions,
disagreements and misunderstandings on the part of the author of this text.
Sorry about that.

The stated topic of this lesson needs some justification: This lesson is not
really about how do to logic in Lojban, since firstly, logic is presumably the
same in all languages, and secondly, actually teaching logic would be totally
impractical in one single lesson. Rather, this lesson explains some constructs
which resemble those which logicians use. It turns out they have a remarkable
wide range of uses in Lojban.

Getting involved in the more obscure details of these logical constructs can
be mind-warpingly difficult, and there will always be some disagreement in the
corners of this part of the language.

Learning these logical constructs requires one to learn a bit about constructs
which are not logical in nature. Let's begin with **zo'u**

    **zo'u** = _Separates prenex from bridi_

Before any **zo'u** is the prenex, after **zo'u** is the bridi. Informally, a
prenex is a place in front of the bridi, where you put a bunch of terms. A
term is an English word given to some kinds of Lojban constructs: Sumti,
sumtcita with or without sumti attached, **na ku** and an abomination called
_termsets_ , which I refuse to include in these lessons. The prenex is not
part of the bridi, but any terms put inside it gives us information about the
bridi. One can, for example, use it to state a topic as shown thus:

**lo pampe'o je nai speni zo'u mi na zanru** \- "Concerning lovers who are not
spouses: I do not approve". The benefits of kind of sentence structuring is
questionable, but it's always good to have some variation to play with.
Furthermore, constructing sentences this way resembles Mandarin (and other
languages) closely, meaning it might seem more intuitive for speakers of that
language.

    **pampe'o** = _x 1 is a lover of x2_

    **zanru** = _x 1 approves of x2 (plan, event or action)_

Of course, the relation between the terms in the prenex and the bridi is
vague. One can imagine any sumti in the prenex bearing the same relevance to
the bridi as if they were put in the bridi after a **do'e** sumtcita, and any
sumtcita in the prenex doing pretty much the same as if they were in the
bridi. It is quite possible to put terms in prenexes without any clear hints
as to how the term may relate to the bridi:

**le vi gerku zo'u mi to'e nelci lo cidjrpitsa** \- "Concerning this dog here:
I dislike pizza." It leaves you guessing about the reason for mentioning the
dog.

    **cidjrpitsa** = _x 1 is pizza with topping/ingredients x2_

If the prenex contains **na ku** , it's pretty straight forward: The entire
bridi is negated, just as if the bridi itself began with **na ku**.

So how long does a prenex last? It lasts until the following bridi is
terminated. If that is not desired, there are two ways to make it apply to
several bridi: One is to put some kind of connective after the **.i**
separating the bridi, and another method is to simply include all of the text
in **tu'e** ... **tu'u** -brackets. These brackets work pretty much by gluing
all the bridi together and makes all sorts of construct apply to several
bridi.

Now that we covered **zo'u** , the first "logical" words we can use it with
are these:

    **da** = _logically quantified existential sumka'i 1_

    **de** = _logically quantified existential sumka'i 2_

    **di** = _logically quantified existential sumka'i 3_

These words are all the same, like the mathematical variables x, y and z. Once
you have defined them, however, they keep refering to the same thing. These
words are defined in the prenex of bridi, meaning that when the prenex stop
applying, the definition of these three words are cancelled.

The words **da** , **de** and **di** can refer to literally any sumti, which
makes them kind of useless unless restricted in some way. The first and
foremost way to restrict them is to quantify them: They are not called
"logically quantified existential sumka'i" for nothing. They are sumka'i, they
are most useful when quantified, and they are existential. What does it mean,
being "existential"? It means that by default, they are used to assert that
something exists. An example:

The statement **pa da zo'u da gerku** has **pa da** in the prenex, which means
"There exists one thing such that it:", and then **da** , now defined, is used
in the bridi **da gerku**. Translated to English, this means: "There exists
one thing which is a dog". This is obviously false, there are around
400,000,000 of them in the world. If **da** and its sisters are not
quantified, the number **su'o** is the default. Thus **da zo'u da gerku**
means "There exist at least one thing which is a dog", which is true. Notice
here, that any quantification must be more or less exact in order to be true:
Of course one dog exists, but in Lojban, **pa da zo'u da gerku** means not
only that does one dog exists, but also that no more than one does.

There are a few specific rules to these existential sumka'i:

\- If the quantifier **ro** is used before **da** , it instead refers to "all
which exists".

\- Importantly, the usage of an existential sumka'i only asserts that such a
thing exists _in the domain of truth where it's used_. Thus, in the sentence
**so'e verba cu krici lo du'u su'o da crida** , does not state **da crida** ,
since its "domain of truth" is only inside the du'u-abstraction. Generally
speaking, abstractions contain their own domain of truth, so using **da** and
friends inside an abstraction is usually safe.

\- If the same variable is quantified several times, the first quantification
is the one which sticks: Any later quantified instance of that variable can
refer only to things which are also being referred to by the first instance of
that variable, and any later non-quantified instance of that variable will
gain the first quantifier. To use an example: **ci da zo'u re da barda .ije da
pelxu** means "There exists three things such that two of them are big and all
three are yellow". **re da** , being after **ci da** , can only refer to two
of the already stated three things. When **da** appears without a quantifier,
**ci** is assumed.

\- If there are several terms in the prenex, the terms are always read left to
right. Sometimes, this matters: **ro da de zo'u da prami de** means
"Concerning all the things X that exists, concerning at least one thing Y: X
loves Y". This is the same as "All things love at least one thing.", where the
"thing(s)" can be anything, including the thing itself. Note here that **de**
can refer to different things for each **da** \- the thing which is referred
to by **de** is dependent on the **da** , since it came before it in the
prenex, therefore each thing might love something different. If we switched
the places of **da** and **de** in the prenex, a different result would arise:
**de ro da zo'u da prami de** = "Concerning at least one thing Y, concerning
all X which exists: X loves Y", meaning "There exists at least one thing which
everything loves".

Of course, both claims are completely false. There are many things which loves
nothing - rocks, or abstract concepts, for example. Likewise, it's impossible
to concieve of something which everything loves, since "everything" also
encompasses non-sentient things. We need better ways to restrict what these
variables can point to. One good way of doing it is to make them the subject
of a relative clause:

**ro di poi remna zo'u birka di** = "Concerning all X that exists, which is
human: X has one or more arms." or "All humans have arms", which is true, at
least when speaking in a potential, timeless sense.

    **birka** = _x 1 is an arm of x2_

When restricting claims using this kind of logical "existential" variable,
it's very important to remember that unless there is an explicit **no** or
**ro** as a quantifier, these kind of statements always imply that there
_actually exists_ something which can be referred to by **da**. Therefore, any
kind of non-negated statement where **da** points to something which does not
exist is false.

**ro da** was also originally defined to imply existence, but is now usually
taken to be equivalent to **no da naku** , "nothing exists that does not ...".
Having this equivalence hold no matter what the formula evaluates to is seen
as more important than having {ro} mirror natural language use exactly.

In fact, you don't really need the prenex to define the variables. You can use
them directly as sumti in the bridi, and quantify them there. You only need to
quantify them the first time they appear, though. Thus, the sentence about
humans having arms could be turned into **birka ro di poi remna**. The order
of the variables still matters though, and so the prenex can be used to avoid
having to mess up your bridi to place the variables in the correct order. When
having more variables, a prenex is usually a good idea.

The second kind of logical words are basically the same as the three we have
already been though, but these are brika'i instead of sumka'i:

    **bu'a** = _logically quantified existential brika'i 1_

    **bu'e** = _logically quantified existential brika'i 2_

    **bu'i** = _logically quantified existential brika'i 3_

These work pretty much the same way as the other three, but there are a few
points which are important to mention:

Since only terms can go in the prenex, these brika'i need to have a quantifier
in order to make them into sumti. When quantified in the prenex, however, the
quantifier works very different from quantifiers with normal selbri: Instead
of quantifying the amount of things which fits the x1 of the selbri variable,
it directly quantifies the amount of selbri which applies. Again, the default
quantifier is **so'u**. Thus, instead of **re bu'a zo'u** meaning "Concerning
two things which is in relationship X:", it means "Concerning two
relationships X:"

It's probably good to see an example of **bu'a** put to practice:

**ro da bu'a la .bab.** = "Considering all X which exists: X is in at least
one relationship with Bob" = "Everything is related to Bob in at least one
way.". Notice again the order matters: **su'o bu'a ro da zo'u da bu'a la
.bab.** means: "There is at least one relationship such that everything that
exists is in that relationship with Bob". The first statement is true - for
any one thing, one can indeed make up some selbri which relates any guy called
Bob and it. But I'm not sure the latter is true - that one can make a selbri
which can relate anything, no matter what it is, and Bob.

Let's have an example which quantifies selbri:

**ci'i bu'e zo'u mi bu'e do** \- "Concerning an infinite amount of
relationships: I am in all those relationship with you." or "There exists an
infinite amount of relationships between us"

You can't quantify the selbri variables in the bridi itself, though. Then it
will act as a sumti: **mi ci'i bu'a do** is not a bridi. There are some
situation where this will become problematic - lesson twenty-nine will teach
how to overcome those problems.

## Lesson 28: Types

This lesson along with the following three lessons will be on semantics - how
to interpret the meaning of certain constructs. This lesson is on the meaning
of different types of sumti, and will get philosophical and a bit hazy. The
following two will be on abstractions, which, even though you already became
familiar with them twenty-two lessons ago, will become more technical as I
attempt to explain their semantic and grammatical properties.

Teaching (and learning) semantics is much more tricky than teaching grammar,
especially in Lojban, where grammar is black-or-white, but semantics isn't.
Therefore, I find it necessary to repeat an earlier disclaimer the following
is not official, but rather an (educated) opinion on the language.

Bad grammar is easy to spot in Lojban - in fact it's unambiguously correct or
not. In contrast, saying that a jufra is semantically wrong is the same as
saying that the speaker is using Lojban to think wrongly about the world. It's
not saying "You can't say X" as much as "You can't interpret X in this way.
You should interpret it this way". Placing these restrictions on composing and
understanding language is a slippery slope leading to restrictions on
creativity, and even presupposing of certain metaphysical viewpoints while
excluding others.

Then why include semantic standards in a textbook? Shouldn't any speaker be
free to say anything, and any listener be free to let that speech mean
whatever they want?

This is a matter of measure. Given that extreme, that is, if no semantic
standards were set, everything could mean anything, and all communication
would be meaningless. In any language which aims to facilitate communication,
one must be able to express oneself in such a way that one can trust that
oneâs message is interpreted in the desired way. Semantic rules of Lojban do
not exist in order to prevent people from saying A. They exist to prevent
people from saying B and having others think they meant A.

This lesson is on types. The word _type_ , informally translated to **klesi**
, is used by Lojbanists to describe the existential nature of the things sumti
describe. This nature is, and must be, the same as the nature of the things
described by other languages such as English. However, in Lojban, the
different ways of making sumti denote which type a sumti belongs to, so while
the exact natures of sumti can be ignored in English, Lojbanists have to deal
with them.

When speaking of types, Lojbanists often mention what type a sumti _really
is_. When beginning from the beginning, we have to remember that this
certainty is not philosophically well grounded. Taking a materialistic
viewpoint, the natural world of particles and waves does not correspond well
with human understanding of say, hatred, which is not defined by any specific
particles, nor any specific brain activity. It is a purely abstract concept.
Similarly, in an extreme inductionist viewpoint, such as that taken by Hume,
all we humans experience are subjective impressions over time - a long string
of events, or, some people argue, a bunch of qualia (This is _green_. This is
_crispy_. This is _round_. This is _tasty_. => "This is an apple".) This
viewpoint, however, does not correspond well to human understanding of say, a
cat, whose existence must be presumed to continue even when it invokes no
qualia in humans, whose qualia vary among different cats, and whose death
smoothly strips it of its catlike qualia.

In other words, while one can take philosophically consistent worldviews where
objects and concepts don't exist, such world views are unfruitful for
conducting human affairs: In our lives, we simply need to refer to objects,
and pretend that they actually exist as such. One famous story tells of a
philosopher, Samuel Johnson, who, frustrated about the philosophical soundness
and un-refutability of a fellow philosopher's belief that the physical world
does not exist, furiously kicks a rock yelling, "I refute it _thus!_ "

In Lojban, most sumti are made from selbri one way or the other, which means
that at the core of most sumti lies a selbri, an action, something which
something _does_. The Sun is not usually referred to as **la solri** , "The
Sun", but often **lo solri** , "something which is being a sun". There are
many confusing philosophical implications of this: As stated before, it's hazy
at best what it means "to cat" and when something _begins catting_ or "stops
catting". A fictional language with similar properties is described in a neat
short story, "TlÃ¶n, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" (where "The Moon rose over the
ocean" is phrased using similar verb/adverb-derived nouns: "Upward behind the
onstreaming it mooned"). In that short story, the language is about to lead to
the collapse of society because the worldview which such a language implies is
unfit for dealing with the realities of Earth.

The take home point of all this is: Precise definitions of the different types
of sumti are impossible, because these categories do not correspond to the
real world. Nonetheless, we need these categories when speaking.

There may possibly be an infinite amount of types, but I'll go through the
ones which are dealt with most often in Lojban:

Material objects are perhaps the easiest to understand, even though they're
hard to defend philosophically. They always have a place in both time and
space, but they're considered to be a constant existing through time. That is,
objects are not considered temporally: A banana carries with it its unchanging
banana-ness even as it ages, until it begins breaking down and stop being a
banana at all. If one could freeze time for all bananas, they would stay
bananas during that frozen time.

Events are, like objects, places in space and time, but events are considered
as unfolding over time: The temporal aspect is as important as the spacial. A
banana can be considered an event, but in that case, the event of being a
banana is composed of the changes the banana undergoes over time, whereas what
makes a banana an object is all that which doesn't change. Freezing time would
also freeze the event of being a banana.

Functions are a term used by a few Lojbanists to describe a group of types.
All functions are abstract concepts and as such don't really exist in the real
world on their own. The nuts and bolt of functions is the subject of lesson
thirty; here, we focus on their semantics alone. There are a few types of
functions:

Selbri are something you're already well familiar with. It describes an act of
doing or being. **crino** understood as a selbri means "being green",
**darxi** means "to hit". A selbri on its own is devoid of the sumti who's
doing or being that selbri. As such, they're divorced from any particular
instance of being green or hitting, and can therefore be understood as a kind
of generalized events. They're used for sentences where no particular instance
of that selbri being applied comes to mind. For instance, if I'm looking
forward to my wedding next Wednesday, I'm thinking about some event placed in
space and time (even if the wedding never actually takes place for some sad
reason), whereas if I'm saying that I'd like to become married one day, I
desire the act of marriage, and thus I desire the selbri, or rather, that the
selbri be applied to me.

Amounts have almost the same grammatical properties as selbri, as you'll see
in two lessons. Semantically, however, they're quite distinct. An amount is
_how much something fits a selbri_ , which is something completely different
from the selbri itself. An amount is some kind of number, or can be
represented by some number, exact or inexact, no matter whether what is
quantified is practically measurable.

There is some disagreement about whether it's correct to use an amount
abstraction to quantify something which is in principle unmeasurable. Thus,
the amount of my greenness is certainly valid, since that could be measured by
say, a digital camera, but speaking about the amount of me being Bob's friend
may not be accepted philosophically. A great example which demonstrates the
difference between amounts and selbri when applied to specific sumti is the
following: "I change in blackness": When "blackness" is considered a selbri,
it means that change from being black to not being black or the other way
around. When "blackness" is considered an amount, it means my skin turns more
or less black (as it does during the winter when there's little sunlight).

Concepts are maybe functions and maybe they're not, depending on who you ask.
Their position as maybe-functions is explained in lesson thirty. Concepts,
unlike selbri and amounts, cannot be applied to sumti. There can be no talk of
_fitting a concept_ , like there can be of whether or not you are _fitting a
selbri_ or measuring the amount of _fitting a selbri_. A concept does not
exist in the real world. A concept is not even represented in the real world,
like amounts or selbri can be when theyâre applied to sumti. A concept, say
_warfare_ , exists only in the minds of people, and is understood as the
meaning of the word _war_. Thus "love" understood as a concept is the idea of
what love is, no matter who loves and who is being loved.

Perhaps an example can demonstrate the difference between amounts, selbri and
concepts:

In "I like loving" and "I like being loved", we are speaking of a selbri.

In the sentence "I like how much I love", I like an amount, and when saying "I
like love", I refer to the concept of love.

Bridi is a type which you're also familiar with. A bridi is certainly not a
function, but it does bear some relation to functions, as we'll see later.
Bridi themselves are imaginary; they exist not in the real world, but inside
texts, the next type to explain. However, bridi are not composed of whichever
specific symbols are used to express them - because bridi are imaginary,
different sentences may express the same bridi. It can be that the sentences
are in different languages, that the word order is changed, or that different
words are used to refer to the same sumti. Thus **mi do prami** /**mi prami
do** , "I love you", **mi ko prami** and **do mi prami** (when spoken by the
person to which **do** refers in the first sentence) all refer to the same
bridi. Bridi always have their full place structure filled by something with a
non-zero value.

The concept of a text is close intertwined with the concept of a bridi. All
bridi are contained in texts, though not all texts contain bridi. Indeed, one
might define a text as something that can contain a bridi, but this can easily
lead to circular definitions when attempting to define what bridi are. The
current understanding of what things should be considered texts is vague at
best. Like bridi, texts are something ethereal, something we can imagine exist
in a realm outside the physical world. While these lessons certainly are a
text, the text is not made of the paper these lessons are printed on, nor the
magnetic fields which constitutes the bytes it's stored on. Those physical
media only _represent_ the text. But what exactly can represent a text? Words,
certainly. But what about body language? And do actions really speak _texts_
louder than words? This is not an issue I'll attempt to answer or even give a
shot in these lessons.

Sets are much easier to deal with. They're a kind of meta-type: A imaginary
box, in which a group of sumti is packed into. This box has very little to do
with what's inside it. A big set does not mean that the things in the set are
big, but that there are many things in the set. Sets have very few properties,
therefore sets are only used when speaking about the number of things in a
given category, the number of things shared between several categories, the
criteria for including things in the category etc.

The last used type is the truth value. I've only seen it in use a handful of
times, and only include it here because it'll be relevant when discussing a
certain abstraction in the next lesson. A truth value is some verdict that a
bridi is true, false, or anywhere in between. The nature of a truth value is a
verdict, "True", "False", "Mostly true" or the like. It's often represented by
a number, such as 0 (false), 1 (true) or 0.5 (halfway true), but this a simply
a representation of the truth value, and not the value itself. One might as
well represent it by a color, ranging from red to blue.

## Lesson 29: Semantics of simple abstractions

Having acquired a terminology suitable for the discussion of types, we can now
more easily take on the semantics of abstractions. Most often, an abstraction
is merely a bridi considered as a certain type. We begin with what I consider
the simplest of abstractions:

    **nu** = _x 1 is an event of BRIDI happening_

You're already familiar with this word and how it's used. A **nu**
-abstraction is always an event, and as such, it's situated in one particular
time and space. Thus:

**mi catlu lo nu lo prenu cu darxi lo gerku**  
 _I watch a person hitting a dog_  
---  
  
is a proper event, whereas

**mi kakne lo nu bajra fi lo mi birka**  
 _I can running on my arms._  
---  
  
is wrong, because no particular event of running is implied: The running
you're able to do is a selbri - a generalized event, and the Lojban sentence
above should sound as badly phrased as its English translation.

There are many ways to view an event, and so there are four other abstractors,
which all also create events. The meaning of these abstractions are all
covered by **nu** , but more specific. I'll go through them all here:

    **mu'e** = _x 1 is a point-like event of BRIDI happening_
    **za'i** = _x 1 is a state of BRIDI being true_
    **pu'u** = _x 1 is a process of BRIDI unfolding through stages x2_
    **zu'o** = _x 1 is an activity of BRIDI consisting of the repeated event of x2_

The understanding of these abstractors is tied to the understanding of event
contours. **mu'e** is akin to the event contour **co'i** in the sense that
both treat the bridi as point-like in time and space:

**lo mu'e mi kanro binxo cu se djica mi**  
 _Me becoming healthy is desired by me_  
---  
  
has the semantic meaning that the process of becoming healthy is not being
considered. If it consists of painful chemotherapy, it is plausible that this
process is not desired at all. _Becoming healthy_ , in a point-like sense is
desired, however.

**za'i** is like the event contour **ca'o** in the sense that **lo za'i
BRIDI** begins to apply when the bridi begins and sharply ends when the bridi
ceases to be true, much like **ca'o**.

**za'o za'i mi kanro binxo** means that the state of me becoming healthy took
too much time; that the time between my health beginning to improve and be
actually being healthy was long-winded.

The actual treatment is perhaps better caught by **pu'u** , which, like event
contours in general, puts emphasis on the entire event as unfolding through
time. **.ii ba zi co'a pu'u mi kanro binxo .oi** expresses fear that the
painful process of becoming healthy is about to begin. The x2 is filled by a
sequence of stages, which can be made by interspacing the stages with the non-
logical connective **ce'o** : **ze'u pu'u mi kanro binxo kei lo nu mi facki
ce'o lo nu mi jai tolsti ce'o lo nu mi renvi** means _something is a long
process of me becoming healthy consisting of the stages A ) I find out B )
something about me begins C ) I endure._

Finally, the semantics of **zu'o** treats the abstraction as consisting of a
number of repeated actions:

**lo za'a zo'u darxi lo tanxe cu rinka lo ca mu'e porpi**  
 _The observed activity of beating the box caused its current brokenness._  
---  
  
is more accurate than the similar sentence using **nu** , because **zu'o**
makes it explicit that it was the repeating of the action of beating, not a
particular instance of beating which broke the box.

The x2 of **zu'o** is either one event or a sequence which is repeated. To be
unnecessarily explicit, we could have stated that the cause of the current
brokenness was **lo zo'u darxi lo tanxe kei lonu lafti lo grana kei ku ce'o
lonu muvgau lo grana lo tanxe kei ku ce'o** ... and so on.

Note the difference between **mu'e bajra** , **za'i bajra** , **pu'u bajra** ,
**zu'o bajra** and **nu bajra** : The point-like event of running puts
emphasis on the event happening, but nothing else. The state of running begins
when the runner begins and stops when the runner stops. The process of running
consists of a warm-up, keeping a steady speed, and the final sprint. The
activity of running consists the cycles of lifting one foot, moving it
forward, dropping it down, repeat with the other foot. All of these aspects
are simultaneously covered by the event of running, **nu bajra**.

Another type of abstractor is the experience abstractor, **li'i** :

    **li'i** = _Experience abstractor: x 1 is x2's internal experience of BRIDI_

An experience can be considered an event type. It has almost the same
attributes: It's placed in space, there's focus on the time over which it
unfolds, and it's not a function.

Unlike event abstractions, however, an experience is explicitly mental - a
**li'i** -abstraction cannot be said to exist outside the mind of a person.
This difference is purely semantic, and exchanging event and experience
abstractors would not be considered a type failure in the same sense as **mi
kakne lo nu...**. It might not make sense, as in **lo kacma cu vreji lo li'i
lo mi pendo cu cliva kei mi** \- _A camera recorded my experience of my friend
leaving_. But then again, cinema is dependent on cameras being able to record
the actors' emotions.

It does, I think, make complete sense to write **mi ciksi lo li'i lo mi pendo
cu cliva kei mi** , **lo li'i lo mi tunba cu morsi cu mukti lo nu mi catra** ,
and the like.

**li'i** is derived from **lifri** , and is indeed a **se lifri** \- an
experience.

A **du'u** -abstraction is probably the other kind of abstraction you're used
to seeing, beside **nu**.

    **du'u** = _Bridi abstractor: x 1 is the bridi of BRIDI, as represented by text x2_

According to the standard, abstractions like truths, lies, things being
discovered or things being believed are all pure bridi:

**.ui sai zi facki lo du'u zi citka lo cidjrpitsa**  
 _Yes! I just found out that pizza will be eaten soon!_  
---  
**mi krici lo du'u la turni cu zbasu pi ro lo munje zi'o**  
 _I believe The Lord created all of the universe._  
---  
  
What is being discovered or believed is the truth of an abstract bridi, so
**du'u** is appropriate.

As you can see from the definition of â'du'u _, the x2 of**du'u** is used for
the text in which the bridi is contained. As stated before, the nature of
texts is hard to nail down, but in practice, **du'u'** s x2 can be used to
express indirect quotation:_

**.ue do pu cusku ku'i lo se du'u do nelci lo ckafi**  
 _Oh! But you said that you liked coffee!_  
---  
  
Out of obligation, this lesson will include the truth value abstractor,
**jei**. Let's see the definition:

    **jei** = _Truth abstraction: x 1 is the truth value of BRIDI under epistemology x2_

**jei** is rarely used, not because truth abstractions are infrequently
needed, but because most Lojbanists use other mechanisms to obtain them. The
real use of **jei** is whenever a truth value which is not "true" or "false"
is needed, i.e. practically never. I'll give a couple of examples:

**mi di'i pensi lo jei mi merko**  
 _I often think about whether I am American or not._  
---  
  
(contrast with _I often think about how American I am_ , which uses an amount
abstraction, not a truth value)

**li pi bi jei la tinjin cu mikce**  
 _It's 80% true that Tindjin is a doctor._  
---  
  
(whatever that might mean)

To conclude this lesson, the abstractor **su'u** is a universal abstractor,
whose x2 can be used to specify how the abstraction should be considered - for
example, which type the abstraction is. It has already been defined, but we
might as well do it again:

    **su'u** = _Universal abstractor x 1 is the abstraction on BRIDI considered as x2 / x1 is the abstraction of BRIDI of type x2._

The idea of this abstraction is easy, so I'll just give a few examples of it
in use and leave it at that:

The English phrase _that I love you_ is definitely a sumti, since it's meant
to function as a subject or object in a sentence. It's also clearly made from
an abstraction. It can therefore be translated **lo su'u mi do prami**.
Without the context of the English sentence, though, it's hard to guess what
kind of abstraction was meant. _I will die happy by the time that I love you._
treats the abstraction as an event happening in time. _The truth is that I
love you._ treats the abstraction like a bridi, which can be considered true
or false. "You don't know how much I love you" treats the (nearly identical)
abstraction as an amount. Using the second sumti place of su'u, these can be
explicitly differentiated:

**lo su'u mi do prami kei be lo fasnu** is an event.

**lo su'u mi do prami kei be lo bridi** is a bridi.

**lo su'u mi do prami kei be lo klani** is an amount.

Using **su'u** this way, the semantic (though not grammatical) range of all
abstractors can be covered. More usually, though, other abstractors are used.

Finally, Lojbanist J. Cowan translated the title of the book _The Crucifixion
of Jesus Considered As A Downhill Bicycle Race_ as **lo su'u la .iecuas.
kuctai selcatra kei be lo sa'ordzifa'a ke nalmatma'e sutyterjvi**.

## Lesson 30: Semantics of functions

Functions are a group of two-three types of abstractions. The term's not
official, but I'll use it here anyway.

The definition of functions is closely related to the neat little word
**ce'u**. **ce'u** is a sumka'i which fills one sumti place. It's only found
usage inside abstractions which are also functions. All functions can have at
least one **ce'u** somewhere in the abstraction - that's what makes them
functions. The **ce'u** can be elided, in which case it's most often assumed
to fill the first elided sumti place of the function, unless context provides
a more reasonable alternative.

What does it actually do? Let's have a look at its definition:

    **ce'u** = _Pseudo-quantifier binding a variable within an abstraction that represents an open place._

Well, that wasn't very helpful, so let me try explaining it with another
approach:

Putting **ce'u** in a sumti place leaves the sumti place empty. The place is
not erased, like if you fill it with **zi'o** , but the place is not filled
with anything - not a specific thing, not a **zu'i** , not a **zo'e** ,
nothing. In that manner, the empty sumti places are reminiscent of the x1, x2,
and x3's we put in the sumti places of English definitions of brivla - marking
"This is where something else can be put".

Thus **mi citka lo ti badna** is "I eat this banana", but **mi citka ce'u** is
"I eat X".

Of course, "I eat X" is meaningless unless that X is filled by something, and
indeed the sentence **mi citka ce'u** is senseless in Lojban as well.

In order to put it to use, we need a function abstraction. We'll begin with
the most often-used: The selbri abstraction **ka**. Let's see its official
gloss:

    **ka** = _Property/quality abstractor (-ness); x 1 is quality/property exhibited by BRIDI._

Under the understanding which I will teach, this gloss is mildly misleading.
Instead, **ka** should probably be glossed such:

    **ka** = _Predicate/selbri abstractor: x 1 is the predicate/selbri of BRIDI (needs at least one open variable i.e. a "ce'u")_

Using a selbri abstraction, "I eat X" can make sense, as in the following
example:

    **ckaji** = _x 1 is characterized by selbri x2_

**lo ti badna cu ckaji lo ka mi citka ce'u** \- "This banana is characterized
by the selbri: "I eat X"", which may be rephrased as "This banana fits the
selbri: "Being eaten by me"", which is of course equivalent to **mi citka lo
ti badna** \- "I eat this banana".

For the statement to make sense, the sumti place held open by **ce'u**
usually, but not always, must be filled by something. The main selbri of the
statement, in this case **ckaji** , gives us a clue how to fill the open sumti
place. Such selbri almost always fill it with a sumti from the main selbri.
How **ce'u** is given a non-zero value has been a subject of minor debate in
Lojbanistan, but the issue is more or less settled: **ce'u** keeps a sumti
place open, and the main selbri then fills it with something, and what fills
the place depends on the selbri in question.

Though it often is, the **ce'u** place need not always be filled by the selbri
in order for the abstraction to make sense: On its own, **lo ka ce'u te vecnu
lo finpe** means: "buying a fish", or "to buy a fish". This can be used in a
sentence without the selbri filling the ââceâuââ in:

**lo se lisri cu srana lo ka ce'u te vecnu lo finpe** \- "The plot is about
buying a fish". Here, **srana** does not apply anything to the **ce'u**
-place, and the abstraction is instead seen as the selbri on its own.

An alternative way of explaining **ce'u** is by regarding the word as
representing variables in a lambda function. For instance, consider the
sentence:

**la .alis. cu djica lo ka ce'u te vecnu lo finpe** \- "Alice wants to buy a
fish"

Here, the first argument of **djica** is the one who wants something, namely
Alice. The second argument is the selbri that Alice wants to fulfill: Buying a
fish.

We can view **ce'u** as a free variable, which then becomes bound by a lambda
abstraction, namely **ka**. Now, **ka ce'u terve'u lo finpe** can be seen as a
lambda function:

` \ x -> te vecnu(x,lo finpe,zo'e,zo'e)`,

and in this case **djica** supplies the lambda function with Alice.

Lambdas can be stored, allowing them to be passed around and use them in
various situations:

**ca'e ko'a ka ce'u dansu .i mi ko'a ckaji .i do ko'a djica .i ma'a ko'a
kakne** \- _It is dancing. I am doing it. You want it. Everyone can do it."_

Now, using **ka** , you can correctly phrase "I can run on my arms". How?

Answer: mi kakne lo ka {ce'u} bajra fi lo mi birka

A lot of often-used gismu take selbri as one of their sumti, which means **lo
ka** is used quite often. A few notable examples are **troci** , **kakne** ,
**djica** , **zukte** , **snada** and **fraxu** :

**lo xasli naâe kakne lo ka silcu la'e la'oi X-files** \- "The donkey cannot
whistle the X-files song"

**.e'o ko lo jai se zgike cu fraxu lo ka darxi lo damri ca lo nu do sipna** \-
"Please forgive the musician for striking the drum when you were sleeping!"

At least one selbri can fill two **ce'u** within a ka-abstraction, namely
ââsimxuââ. What does the following jufra mean?

**mi lo pampe'o cu simxu lo ka {ce'u ce'u} gletu**

Answer: _Me and my lover have sex with each other mutually"_

Of course, the **ce'u** need not be placed in the beginning of the **ka**
-abstraction, though it is by default. One could very well speak of:

**lo ka la .bab. melbi ce'u** \- "The selbri of: "Bob is beautiful according
to X"", or in other words: "Thinking that Bob is beautiful".

Indeed, moving the **ce'u** around in an function creates very different
meanings:

**lo ka ce'u panzi la .maik.** \- "The selbri: "X is a child of Mike"" =
"Being Mike's child", versus

**lo ka la .maik. panzi ce'u** \- "The selbri: "Mike is a child of X"" =
"Being the parent of Mike".

One could even imagine a statement in where the **ce'u** is placed in a very
unconventional place, that nonetheless is quite intuitive:

**mi .e nai do ckaji lo ka lo bruna cu jbocre** , wherein the **ce'u** is
elided, but most probably hiding in **lo bruna be ce'u** , therefore meaning
"I and not you is characterized by the selbri: "The brother of X is good at
Lojban"", which is the same as "I have a brother who's good at Lojban, but you
don't".

One can make a function, like a "ka"-abstraction, and fill all sumti places,
leaving no place for a **ce'u**. The resulting bridi are weird:

**mi kakne lo ka mi merko lo mi bangu** \- "I can my language is American".
This is clearly a type error. Some people regard functions without any
**ce'u** to be equivalent to bridi abstractions, so that:

**mi krici lo ka mi vrude la cevni** is the same as **mi krici lo du'u mi
vrude la cevni** \- "I believe that I am good in the eyes of God", and is just
as good a sentence in Lojban as its translation is in English. In my opinion,
one should refrain from using any of the function abstractors if one doesn't
want to use a function. If you mean **du'u** , use **du'u**.

The other abstractor which clearly can provide a function is **ni**. Like
**ka** , a **ce'u** can be placed in a **ni** abstraction, but unlike with
ââkaââ, using a ââceâuââ with ââniââ is not mandatory. Thus, if no **ce'u** is
placed in a **ni** -abstraction, one cannot assume that it's elided - it might
simply not be there. If the main selbri is not one which clearly tells us how
to fill a **ce'u** -place, such as **zmadu** or **mleca** , there's probably
no **ce'u** at all.

In all other aspects, the way **ce'u** works within the abstraction is just
like **ka** , so the difference is purely semantical. Whereas **ka** creates a
selbri, **ni** creates an amount. Here's the definition of the word:

    **ni** = _Amount abstraction: x 1 is the amount of BRIDI on scale x2_

Being familiar with **ka** , the usage of **ni** should be straightforward:

**mi zmadu do lo ni {ce'u} xekri** \- "I exceed you in amount: "X is black"",
or: "I'm blacker than you." As stated in lesson twenty-eight, all agree that
this makes total sense because the brightness of one's skin could be measured
by a camera. However, some people will not accept the unmeasurable:

**mi zmadu do lo ni mi pendo la .maik.** \- "I am more of a friend of Mike
than you are". I think using amounts to quantify the unmeasurable is fine, but
that is an issue I swept under the carpet two lessons ago, and I'm not gonna
take it on here.

It's absolutely clear, however, that it's wrong to use **ni** as a way to
enumerate how many objects fit a selbri - it's always about to which extent
certain sumti fit a selbri. Thus:

**do mleca mi lo ni panzi ce'u** means "You are less of a parent than I am",
and not "You have fewer children than me".

In case you're curious (I was), the jufra **zo'e panzi ce'u** in the previous
example actually refers to two distinct bridi, because the selbri fills the
open **ce'u** -place twice, once for **do** , and once for **mi** , making the
two sub-bridi: **zo'e panzi do** and **zo'e panzi mi**. Since these two bridi
are considered different, the **zo'e** need not refer to the same object.

What does it mean if you don't use a **ce'u** inside a **ni** -abstraction?
Well, then the main selbri can't fill any of the sumti in the abstraction, so
when using selbri like **zmadu** and **mleca** , there's a good chance it
won't make any sense. However, if **ni** itself is the main selbri, it's
totally fine to avoid using any **ce'u** at all:

**li du'e ni do nelci lo vanju**  
 _You like wine too much._  
---  
  
The last of the abstractors we treat in this lesson is **si'o** , the concept
abstractor. **si'o** may be considered a function, or it may not be considered
a function. A **si'o** -abstraction certainly contains a **ce'u** \- in fact,
under the understanding which I am teaching, a **si'o** -abstraction always
contains nothing but **ce'u** s! These **ce'u** s, unlike those of **ka** or
**ni** , remain open and cannot be filled by any selbri. In other words, the
function cannot be applied to anything, which is what makes it a maybe-
function.

    **si'o** = _Concept abstractor: x 1 is x2's concept of BRIDI_

Let's have a few examples:

**lo si'o xebni** , which, because all the sumti places are filled with
**ce'u** is equivalent to:

**lo si'o ce'u xebni ce'u** \- "The concept of: "X hates Y"" = "The concept of
hate" = _Hate_

The mythical creatures Balrog from Lord of the Rings are described as being
"shadow and flame", the poesy of which appears much stronger in Lojban: **la
balrog cu si'o fagri joi manku** is asserting not only that itâs made out of
shadow and flame, but also suggesting that itâs the prototypical Shadow and
Flame, from which all other shadow and flame derives.

For good measure, it should be stated that etymologically, "si'o" derives from
"sidbo", "idea", but in current usage an idea is considered a text and not a
concept.

The difference between the three abstractors **ka** , **ni** and **si'o** can
be illustrated with a few more examples for comparison:

**lo ka crino cu pluka mi**  
 _Being green pleases me_  
---  
**lo ni crino cu pluka mi**  
 _How much {zo'e} is green pleases me (no**ce'u**!)_  
---  
**lo si'o crino cu pluka mi**  
 _Greenness pleases me_  
---  
**mi nitcu lo ka sipna ku lo ka kanro**  
 _I need sleep in order to be healthy_  
---  
**mi nitcu lo si'o sipna lo ka tavla fi lo sipna**  
 _I need the concept of sleep in order to speak about sleeping things_  
---  
  
And I was tempted to write **mi nitcu lo ni sipna ku lo ka vreji ri** \- "I
need the amount of how much {zo'e} sleeps", but that doesn't seem to make a
lot of sense.

## Lesson 31: The not-so-cute assorted words

Yes, this lesson is yet another which focuses on assorted words. This time,
however, the content of the lesson is not chosen by common usage: Unlike words
like **jai** and **si** , most of the following words see little usage in
ordinary conversation. Some of them are, however, important to understanding
the following lessons, and so these words must be awkwardly placed before
their usage in these lessons.

Before we venture to obscure words, there's one word which I think deserves a
more thorough explanation than it has been given so far: **kau**.

**kau** was explained in lesson twelve, but the real implications of it was
not. If you have forgotten what it means, I advice you to go back and see.
Unfortunately, I can't present a theory on what **kau** does when it's present
in the main bridi, only on what it does inside an abstraction.

A bridi with abstraction containing a **kau** makes two claims: The bridi
itself makes one claim as usual, and implicit in the abstraction is
furthermore the claim that the word **kau** is attached to has a real, nonzero
meaning.

This should be demonstrated: The bridi **mi pu viska lo nu ma kau cliva le
salci** (I saw who left the party) makes two claims. First, it makes an
implicit claim that the **ma** refers to something real. That is, the bridi
actually claims that **da cliva le salci** (X left the party). Secondly, the
main bridi makes the claim that what the **ma** refers to is what was being
seen, or in lojban **mi pu viska lo nu da cliva le salci**. (I saw that X left
the party)

This principle is not restricted to the abstractor **nu** , or to the question
word **ma**. The same principle can be extended to any other abstractor and
any other question word, as in the following bridi:

**la .bab. na'e birti lo du'u xu kau la .mias. pampe'o** (Bob isn't sure
whether or not Mia has a boyfriend) states firstly that **xu** applies, which
means that a truth value correctly can be assigned to the bridi, and secondly
that what Bob isn't sure about is the correct truth value for the bridi.

**kau** can also be applied to a non-question word. This doesn't really change
the meaning of the word. The same procedure still applies:

**do ca'o djuno lo du'u la krestcen kau cu cinba la an**  
 _You already know that it was Kristian, who kissed Anne._  
---  
  
states firstly that **la krestcen cu cinba la an** and then that **do ca'o
djuno lodu'u la krestcen cu cinba la an**.

Moving on to the more obscure words, we can begin with **xi** ; it's easy.

    **xi** = _Subscript. Converts any following number string to a subscript, which has the grammar of an attitudinal (ie. placable practically anywhere)._

There are few officially encouraged uses of **xi** , but precisely because the
construct **xi** +number has the free grammar of an attitudinal, the possible
uses of **xi** are almost endless. In general, it's used to enumerate any
word, variable or grammatical construct, as opposed to what it refers to.
Let's see some examples.

**la tsani cu cusku zo coi .i ba bo la .triliyn. cu cusku lu .ui coi la tsani
coi la klaku li'u .i ba bo la klaku cu spusku fi lu coi ty. xi pa .e ty. xi re
do'u zo'o li'u**  
 _Tsani said "hi", then Triliyn said "Hey Tsani, hey Klaku :)", then Klaku
answered "Hello T1 and T2 :P"._  
---  
  
    **spusku** = _x 1 makes a reply x2 (text) to x3_

Because it's the standard that **ty.** refers to the last sumti which began
with T, **ty** by itself as said by Klaku would have referred to Tsani. Two
_different_ **ty.** can be made by subscripting with **xi**.

If the rare situation arises that we need more variables of the type **da** or
**bu'a** that there are in the language, an infinite number can be made by
simply subscripting any existing with a number. Note that a non-subscripted
variable is not defined of being equivalent to any subscripted one. That is:
**ty** is not always equal to **ty xi pa** or **ty xi no** or anything of the
sort. I expect this to be rarely used, because any sentence with more than 3
**da** -like words or more than 10 **ko'a** -like words would be hard to keep
track of.

Second, we have **ki** , of which I am not aware of a single usage in my time
on IRC; probably not because the word's useless, but because few Lojbanic
texts are of the kind where you need it.

    **ki** = _"Sticky tense". Set/use tense default; establishes new open scope space/time/modal reference base._

Any row of tense words can be suffixed with **ki** to make the tense(s) apply
to all following bridi. When, for instance, telling a story, this can be used
to make explicit that the default time - the time as meant without any tense
words - is the time the story is placed in. Usually, this will not be
necessary; beginning a fairytale with **pu zu vu ku** , one can assume that
the entire tale is happening a long time ago and far away. Let's have an
example:

**pu zu vu ki ku zasti fa lo pukclite je cmalu nixli goi ko'a .i ro da poi _pu
zu vu_ viska ko'a cu nelci ko'a**  
 _Once upon a time there was a sweet, little girl. Everyone who saw her liked
her._  
---  
  
The **ki** allows us to elide the three tenses in the second bridi, and in all
the bridi to follow.

So, if a bunch of tenses have been make sticky with **ki** , how do we unstick
them? Simply use **ki** by itself, and all sticky tenses are made unsticky.

Lastly, several sets of tenses can be made sticky by subscripting **ki**. If
there are several of such sets in usage at any given time, one can use the
subscripted **ki** s to make the corresponding set of tenses apply.
Unsubscripted **ki** alone still makes all tense stickiness disappear, so you
have to be careful not to use **ki** unsubscripted if you plan on using
several sets of tenses.

Changing subject. There's a set of sumtcita which are often used, but which I
dare not try to define if not under the disclaimer of part three. Let's see
official definitions for two of them first.

    **ca'a** = _modal aspect: actuality/ongoing event. Bridi has/is/will happen during under the circumstances of {sumti_}
    **ka'e** = _modal aspect: innate capability; possibly unrealized. Bridi is possible under the circumstances of {sumti_}

Let's first contrast **ca'a** with **ka'e**. **ka'e** means that the bridi is
"possible if the event of SUMTI has/is/will occur". **ca'a** by contrast,
means that the bridi "has, is, or will happen if the event of SUMTI
has/is/will occur".

Like all sumtcita, their corresponding sumti can be elided if the sumtcita is
placed before the selbri:

**le vi sovda ka'e fulta .i ja'o bo ri fusra** \- "This egg floats. Therefore,
it's rotten".

By using **ka'e** , this sentence does not state that the egg has floated, or
ever will float, but rather that it could float.

    **pu'i** = _modal aspect: can and has; demonstrated potential. Bridi could or could not happen, but in fact it is/did/will happen under the circumstance of {sumti}_
    **nu'o** = _modal aspect: can but has not; unrealized potential. Bridi is possible, but is/will/have not happened under {sumti}_

Understanding **ka'e** and **ca'a** , **nu'o** simply means **ka'e je na ku
ca'a** , and **pu'i** means **ca'a je ka'e na ku**.

Historically, these four words was tense sumtcita - therefore the "modal
aspect" in their definitions. All tense sumtcita was then not considered
sumtcita at all, but rather "selbri tcita". A modern understanding of Lojban
is gaining popularity, wherein the tense sumtcita are considered sumtcita,
almost exactly like the BAI, and in where selbri tcita are not used.

Because of these four words' history as selbri tcita, they can be freely
elided - indeed, since one of the four words always applies, one is always
assumed to be elided. This is most often **ca'a**. Indeed, it's so often
**ca'a** that one could wonder why **ca'a** is not the default.

One reason is that some selbri has two useful definitions, one which implies
**ka'e SELBRI** and one which implies **ca'a SELBRI**. For an example, see
**fasnu** , which can mean "x1 is happening" or "x1 is an event", where the
first implies **ca'a fasnu** and the second **ka'e fasnu**

Another use of "implied **ka'e** " is as a way to escape an annoying
philosophical problem in the language. A selbri only applies if all its places
apply too. For some selbri, like **kabri** , that's a problem.

    **kabri** = _x 1 is a cup containing contents x2 and of material x3_

The definition suggests that if the content of the cup is removed, the x2 no
longer applies and it stops being **lo kabri**. Implied **ka'e** , or more
fittingly, **nu'o** , let us escape that problem.

## End of lessons

Sorry, but as of now, there are no more lessons in this series. Perhaps more
will be added later.

  

Retrieved from
"https://mw.lojban.org/index.php?title=Lojban_Wave_Lessons/Single_page&oldid=120977"

## Navigation

### Navigation

  * Learning
  * Questions
  * Live chat
  * Contacts
  * Recent changes

## Wiki tools

### Wiki tools

  * Special pages

## Page tools

### Page tools

### User page tools

### More

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Page logs

  * 

  * This page was last edited on 27 June 2016, at 12:44.



There is also some additional information in the form of supplements:

Lujvo Algorithm:
Previous

rafsi

Next

cmene

The Shape Of Words To Come: Lojban Morphology

The Lojban Reference Grammar

* * *

### 7\. fu'ivla

The use of tanru or lujvo is not always appropriate for very concrete or
specific terms (e.g. âbrieâ or âcobraâ), or for jargon words specialized to a
narrow field (e.g. âquarkâ, âintegralâ, or âiambic pentameterâ). These words
are in effect names for concepts, and the names were invented by speakers of
another language. The vast majority of words referring to plants, animals,
foods, and scientific terminology cannot be easily expressed as tanru. They
thus must be borrowed (actually âcopiedâ) into Lojban from the original
language.

There are four stages of borrowing in Lojban, as words become more and more
modified (but shorter and easier to use). Stage 1 is the use of a foreign name
quoted with the cmavo âla'oâ (explained in full in Chapter 19):

    
    
    7.1)   me la'o ly. spaghetti .ly.
    

is a predicate with the place structure âx1 is a quantity of spaghettiâ.

Stage 2 involves changing the foreign name to a Lojbanized name, as explained
in Section 8:

    
    
    7.2)   me la spagetis.
    

One of these expedients is often quite sufficient when you need a word quickly
in conversation. (This can make it easier to get by when you do not yet have
full command of the Lojban vocabulary, provided you are talking to someone who
will recognize the borrowing.)

Where a little more universality is desired, the word to be borrowed must be
Lojbanized into one of several permitted forms. A rafsi is then usually
attached to the beginning of the Lojbanized form, using a hyphen to ensure
that the resulting word doesnât fall apart.

The rafsi categorizes or limits the meaning of the fu'ivla; otherwise a word
having several different jargon meanings in other languages would require the
word-inventor to choose which meaning should be assigned to the fu'ivla, since
fu'ivla (like other brivla) are not permitted to have more than one
definition. Such a Stage 3 borrowing is the most common kind of fu'ivla.

Finally, Stage 4 fu'ivla do not have any rafsi classifier, and are used where
a fu'ivla has become so common or so important that it must be made as short
as possible. (See Section 16 for a proposal concerning Stage 4 fu'ivla.)

The form of a fu'ivla reliably distinguishes it from both the gismu and the
cmavo. Like cultural gismu, fu'ivla are generally based on a word from a
single non-Lojban language. The word is âborrowedâ (actually âcopiedâ, hence
the Lojban tanru âfukpi valsiâ) from the other language and Lojbanized â the
phonemes are converted to their closest Lojban equivalent and modifications
are made as necessary to make the word a legitimate Lojban fu'ivla-form word.
All fu'ivla:

  1. must contain a consonant cluster in the first five letters of the word; if this consonant cluster is at the beginning, it must either be a permissible initial consonant pair, or a longer cluster such that each pair of adjacent consonants in the cluster is a permissible initial consonant pair: âspraileâ is acceptable, but not âktraileâ or âtrkaileâ;
  2. must end in one or more vowels;
  3. must not be gismu or lujvo, or any combination of cmavo, gismu, and lujvo; furthermore, a fu'ivla with a CV cmavo joined to the front of it must not have the form of a lujvo (the so-called âslinku'i testâ, not discussed further in this book);
  4. cannot contain âyâ, although they may contain syllabic pronunciations of Lojban consonants;
  5. like other brivla, are stressed on the penultimate syllable.

Note that consonant triples or larger clusters that are not at the beginning
of a fu'ivla can be quite flexible, as long as all consonant pairs are
permissible. There is no need to restrict fu'ivla clusters to permissible
initial pairs except at the beginning.

This is a fairly liberal definition and allows quite a lot of possibilities
within âfu'ivla spaceâ. Stage 3 fu'ivla can be made easily on the fly, as
lujvo can, because the procedure for forming them always guarantees a word
that cannot violate any of the rules. Stage 4 fu'ivla require running tests
that are not simple to characterize or perform, and should be made only after
deliberation and by someone knowledgeable about all the considerations that
apply.

Here is a simple and reliable procedure for making a non-Lojban word into a
valid Stage 3 fu'ivla:

  1. Eliminate all double consonants and silent letters.
  2. Convert all sounds to their closest Lojban equivalents. Lojban âyâ, however, may not be used in any fu'ivla.
  3. If the last letter is not a vowel, modify the ending so that the word ends in a vowel, either by removing a final consonant or by adding a suggestively chosen final vowel.
  4. If the first letter is not a consonant, modify the beginning so that the word begins with a consonant, either by removing an initial vowel or adding a suggestively chosen initial consonant.
  5. Prefix the result of steps 1-5 with a 4-letter rafsi that categorizes the fu'ivla into a âtopic areaâ. It is only safe to use a 4-letter rafsi; short rafsi sometimes produce invalid fu'ivla. Hyphenate the rafsi to the rest of the fu'ivla with an ârâ-hyphen; if that would produce a double ârâ, use an ânâ-hyphen instead; if the rafsi ends in ârâ and the rest of the fu'ivla begins with ânâ (or vice versa), or if the rafsi ends in "r" and the rest of the fu'ivla begins with "tc", "ts", "dj", or "dz" (using "n" would result in a phonotactically impermissible cluster), use an âlâ-hyphen. (This is the only use of âlâ-hyphen in Lojban.)

Alternatively, if a CVC-form short rafsi is available it can be used instead
of the long rafsi.

  6. Remember that the stress necessarily appears on the penultimate (next-to-the-last) syllable.

In this section, the hyphen is set off with commas in the examples, but these
commas are not required in writing, and the hyphen need not be pronounced as a
separate syllable.

Here are a few examples:

    
    
    7.3)   spaghetti (from English or Italian)
           spageti (Lojbanize)
           cidj,r,spageti (prefix long rafsi)
           dja,r,spageti (prefix short rafsi)
    

where âcidj-â is the 4-letter rafsi for âcidjaâ, the Lojban gismu for âfoodâ,
thus categorizing âcidjrspagetiâ as a kind of food. The form with the short
rafsi happens to work, but such good fortune cannot be relied on: in any
event, it means the same thing.

    
    
    7.4)   Acer (the scientific name of maple trees)
           acer (Lojbanize)
           xaceru (add initial consonant and final vowel)
           tric,r,xaceru (prefix rafsi)
           ric,r,xaceru (prefix short rafsi)
    

where âtric-â and âric-â are rafsi for âtricuâ, the gismu for âtreeâ. Note
that by the same principles, âmaple sugarâ could get the fu'ivla
âsaktrxaceruâ, or could be represented by the tanru âtricrxaceru saktaâ.
Technically, âricrxaceruâ and âtricrxaceruâ are distinct fu'ivla, but they
would surely be given the same meanings if both happened to be in use.

    
    
    7.5)   brie (from French)
           bri (Lojbanize)
           cirl,r,bri (prefix rafsi)
    

where âcirl-â represents âcirlaâ (âcheeseâ).

    
    
    7.6)   cobra
           kobra (Lojbanize)
           sinc,r,kobra (prefix rafsi)
    

where âsinc-â represents âsinceâ (âsnakeâ).

    
    
    7.7)   quark
           kuark (Lojbanize)
           kuarka (add final vowel)
           sask,r,kuarka (prefix rafsi)
    

where âsask-â represents âsaskeâ (âscienceâ). Note the extra vowel âaâ added
to the end of the word, and the diphthong âuaâ, which never appears in gismu
or lujvo, but may appear in fu'ivla.

    
    
    
    7.8)   ìëª¨ (from Korean)
           djamo (Lojbanize)
           lerf,r,djamo (prefix rafsi)
           ler,l,djamo (prefix rafsi)
    

where âler-â represents âlerfuâ (âletterâ). Note the l-hyphen in "lerldjamo",
since "lerndjamo" contains the forbidden cluster "ndj".

The use of the prefix helps distinguish among the many possible meanings of
the borrowed word, depending on the field. As it happens, âspagetiâ and
âkuarkaâ are valid Stage 4 fu'ivla, but âxaceruâ looks like a compound cmavo,
and âkobraâ like a gismu.

For another example, âintegralâ has a specific meaning to a mathematician. But
the Lojban fu'ivla âintegraleâ, which is a valid Stage 4 fu'ivla, does not
convey that mathematical sense to a non-mathematical listener, even one with
an English-speaking background; its source â the English word âintegralâ â has
various other specialized meanings in other fields.

Left uncontrolled, âintegraleâ almost certainly would eventually come to mean
the same collection of loosely related concepts that English associates with
âintegralâ, with only the context to indicate (possibly) that the mathematical
term is meant.

The prefix method would render the mathematical concept as âcmacrntegraleâ, if
the âiâ of âintegraleâ is removed, or something like âcmacrnintegraleâ, if a
new consonant is added to the beginning; âcmac-â is the rafsi for âcmaciâ
(âmathematicsâ). The architectural sense of âintegralâ might be conveyed with
âdjinrnintegraleâ or âtarmrnintegraleâ, where âdinjuâ and âtarmiâ mean
âbuildingâ and âformâ respectively.

Here are some fu'ivla representing cultures and related things, shown with
more than one rafsi prefix:

    
    
    7.9)   bang,r,blgaria
           Bulgarian (in language)
    
    7.10)   kuln,r,blgaria
           Bulgarian (in culture)
    
    7.11)  gugd,r,blgaria
           Bulgaria (the country)
    
    7.12)  bang,r,kore,a
           Korean (the language)
    
    7.13)  kuln,r,kore,a
           Korean (the culture)
    

Note the commas in Examples 7.12 and 7.13, used because âeaâ is not a valid
diphthong in Lojban. Arguably, some form of the native name âChosenâ should
have been used instead of the internationally known âKoreaâ; this is a
recurring problem in all borrowings. In general, it is better to use the
native name unless using it will severely impede understanding: âNavajoâ is
far more widely known than âDineâeâ.

* * *

Previous

rafsi

Next

cmene

The Shape Of Words To Come: Lojban Morphology

The Lojban Reference Grammar



Fuivla Types:
Previous  
  
Considerations for making lujvo

Next

The lujvo scoring algorithm

The Shape Of Words To Come: Lojban Morphology

The Lojban Reference Grammar

* * *

### 11\. The lujvo-making algorithm

The following is the current algorithm for generating Lojban lujvo given a
known tanru and a complete list of gismu and their assigned rafsi. The
algorithm was designed by Bob LeChevalier and Dr. James Cooke Brown for
computer program implementation. It was modified in 1989 with the assistance
of Nora LeChevalier, who detected a flaw in the original âtosmabru testâ.

Given a tanru that is to be made into a lujvo:

1)

    Choose a 3-letter or 4-letter rafsi for each of the gismu and cmavo in the tanru except the last.
2)

    Choose a 3-letter (CVV-form or CCV-form) or 5-letter rafsi for the final gismu in the tanru.
3)

    Join the resulting string of rafsi, initially without hyphens.
4)

    Add hyphen letters where necessary. It is illegal to add a hyphen at a place that is not required by this algorithm. Right-to-left tests are recommended, for reasons discussed below. 

4a)

    If there are more than two words in the tanru, put an ârâ-hyphen (or an ânâ-hyphen) after the first rafsi if it is CVV-form. If there are exactly two words, then put an ârâ-hyphen (or an ânâ-hyphen) between the two rafsi if the first rafsi is CVV-form, unless the second rafsi is CCV-form (for example, âsaicliâ requires no hyphen). Use an ârâ-hyphen unless the letter after the hyphen is ârâ, in which case use an ânâ-hyphen. Never use an ânâ-hyphen unless it is required.
4b)

    Put a âyâ-hyphen between the consonants of any impermissible consonant pair. This will always appear between rafsi.
4c)

    Put a âyâ-hyphen after any 4-letter rafsi form.
5)

    Test all forms with one or more initial CVC-form rafsi â with the pattern âCVC ... CVC + Xâ â for âtosmabru failureâ. X must either be a CVCCV long rafsi that happens to have a permissible initial pair as the consonant cluster, or is something which has caused a âyâ-hyphen to be installed between the previous CVC and itself by one of the above rules.
    The test is as follows: 

5a)

    Examine all the C/C consonant pairs up to the first "y"-hyphen, or up to the end of the word in case there are no "y"-hyphens.
    These consonant pairs are called âjointsâ.
5b)

    If all of those joints are permissible initials, then the trial word will break up into a cmavo and a shorter brivla. If not, the word will not break up, and no further hyphens are needed.
5c)

    Install a âyâ-hyphen at the first such joint.

Note that the âtosmabru testâ implies that the algorithm will be more
efficient if rafsi junctures are tested for required hyphens from right to
left, instead of from left to right; when the test is required, it cannot be
completed until hyphenation to the right has been determined.

* * *

Previous

Considerations for making lujvo

Next

The lujvo scoring algorithm

The Shape Of Words To Come: Lojban Morphology

The Lojban Reference Grammar